Title: Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study – An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Process Author(s): Report federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, federal aviation administration Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The Report of the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process. March 2002 US Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration March 14, 2002 Federal Aviation Administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification 800 Independence Avenue, S.W.Washington, DC 20591 Dear Mr. Sabatini, It is a pleasure to forward the team’s report, Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study – An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The main objective of this evaluation was to identify opportunities for process improvements, and I am confident that this study has met that goal. The findings and observations in this document should form the basis for additional efforts, enabling a remarkable safety system to improve even. During this year’s work, the team and I have frequently remarked on how successful the vast majority of today’s processes and procedures are in accomplishing their safety objectives. This does not imply that there are no areas that could be improved upon, and this study identifies some of them. However, I suggest that as we move forward with the identification and implementation of improvements, due consideration should be given to the complex interrelationship among these many successful processes that already exist. Thank you for the opportunity to chair and lead this team. It was a pleasure to work with such tal-ented and professional individuals, both from government and private sectors. I look forward to con-tinuing to support this effort. Respectfully, Daniel Cheney Chairman Executive Summary Introduction The safety of large transport airplanes operating in commercial service throughout the world has improved over the last several decades. Recently, this rate of improvement has slowed, as many of the major, high-impact safety improvements have been developed and implemented by the industry. However, several recent accidents have highlighted the complex nature of accident prevention and the importance of understanding and improving the processes associated with the certification, operations, and maintenance of airplanes. In 1998, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) implemented the Safer Skies initiative, the goal of which was to reduce the US commercial fatal accident rate by 80 percent by 2007. This initiative has focused on using data to understand the root causes of aviation accidents and incidents in order to identify and apply intervention strategies. As a complement to the Safer Skies initiative and to address the role that processes play in accident prevention, the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification chartered the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study (CPS) in January 2001. The team was led by the FAA, co-chaired by industry, and comprised of technical experts from the FAA, the US aviation industry, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Department of Defense (DoD), and Sandia National Laboratories, as well as representatives from a major non-US manufacturer and a non-US independent airworthiness consultant. The team was chartered to conduct a comprehensive review of the processes and procedures associated with aircraft certification, operations, and maintenance, starting with the original type certification activities and extending through the continued operational safety and airworthiness processes intended to maintain the safety of the US commercial airplane fleet in service. The CPS team accomplished a detailed analysis of the various processes, relationships, and life-cycle considerations. The CPS team identified five primary focus areas to group their findings and observations.• Airplane Safety Assurance Processes• Aviation Safety Data Management• Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces• Major Repair and Modification• Safety Oversight ProcessesThe CPS effort focused on certification, operations, and maintenance processes and the information paths between them, as depicted in Figure 1. Of special interest were the content and effectiveness of the information paths between certification and operations and maintenance activities (the arrows). Findings and observations were continuously reviewed against this diagram to ensure they were applicable to the CPS charter. Following analysis and investigation, the team developed and documented fifteen findings and two observations. Summary of the Findings and Observations Airplane Safety Assurance Processes There are many elements to the safety assurance of commercial airplanes. These include the safety assessments performed to support type certification and the continuing adherence to essential operations and maintenance procedures for the life of the airplane. The design team of a new airplane must ensure that all the safety and performance requirements are met. This requires a development assurance process to track the design as it evolves. The airplane safety assessment process can be thought of as a part of this design and development assurance process. As with all design assurance processes, for the safety assessment process to be effective, it must be traced through the entire life cycle of the product. Finding 1 Human performance is still the dominant factor in accidents: • The processes used to determine and validate human responses to failure and methods to include human responses in safety assessments need to be improved. • Design techniques, safety assessments, and regulations do not adequately address the subject of human error in design or in operations and maintenance. If significant strides are to be made in lowering the accident rates, a much better understanding of the issues affecting human performance is required. Airplane designers will be challenged to develop systems that are less error-prone. Procedures will also have to be more explicit and more robust with respect to the range of skills and techniques of operations and maintenance personnel. This area would benefit from a better understanding of lessons learned and a sharing of human engineering best practices throughout the industry. Finding 2 There is no reliable process to ensure that assumptions made in the safety assessments are valid with respect to operations and maintenance activities, and that operators are aware of these assumptions when developing their operations and maintenance procedures. In addition, certification standards may not reflect the actual operating environment. It will always be necessary to make assumptions in safety analyses; however, where possible, those assumptions may need to be validated by actual experience. There is currently no organized program to periodically revisit design safety assumptions to ensure that they reflect the full range of environments and operations as the fleet ages. Finding 3 A more robust approach to design and a process that challenges the assumptions made in the safety analysis of flight critical functions is necessary in situations where a few failures (2 or 3) could result in a catastrophic event. This finding highlights the need to examine every safety analysis assumption for its impact on the overall safety of the airplane. Where any assumption has a major effect on the outcome, the analysis and design should address the potential for the assumption to be too optimistic. Risk can often be reduced by the selection of a relatively conservative design approach with respect to systems with potentially catastrophic failure consequences. Finding 4 Processes for identification of safety critical features of the airplane do not ensure that future alterations, maintenance, repairs, or changes to operational procedures can be made with cognizance of those safety features. Changes developed without Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) involvement or without understanding of the original certification assumptions add risk because the modifier, maintainer, or operator may not be aware of the criticality of the original type of design feature being modified. It is difficult for operators to develop such procedures in accordance with those design constraints because only the original equipment manufacturer may have a detailed understanding and documentation of the underlying safety issues. Aviation Safety Data Management The effective management of data is crucial if the federal aviation administration and industry are to fully understand the nature of the safety challenges facing them. Data systems and sources within the federal aviation administration and industry were reviewed and analyzed. How these systems are managed and their success at meeting the needs of their customers are important indicators of their effectiveness. Finally, the data systems must provide the user with the necessary information to be effective at identifying safety issues and accident precursors. Finding 5 Multiple FAA-sponsored data collection and analysis programs exist without adequate inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Overlapping objectives, activities, and limited resources indicate federal aviation administration data programs are not adequately coordinated. There is minimal intra-FAA data management program coordination, and no clearly defined office is responsible for coordinating these activities. Significant effort is underway to improve the quality of aviation safety data identification and collection. Implementing an oversight function in accordance with federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, Data Management (June 20, 2001) would permit the federal aviation administration to streamline resources and programs and expand program capabilities. Finding 6 Basic data definition and reporting requirements are poorly defined relative to the needs of analysts and other users. Data are being collected in non-standardized formats and stored in multiple, often incomplete, databases. Analysis tools are usually incompatible and narrowly focused on a specific objective or product. As a result, resources are expended on multiple projects and produce separate yet essentially equivalent products. As a result of multiple dissimilar data collection programs, associated products may not serve the aviation safety needs of the government and industry. Finding 7 There is no widely accepted process for analyzing service data or events to identify potential accident precursors. Data management programs must create products and services that effectively identify accident precursors. Data collection, data mining, and analysis with automated tools to alleviate resource constraints and human error must be developed and used. Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces The sharing of information between manufacturers, airlines, and regulatory agencies is an essential element in the certification process and in maintaining the airworthiness of in-service airplanes. Accident and incident investigations continually focus on the breakdown in the communication paths between the members of the aviation industry as being causal or contributory to those events. These breakdowns occur as a result of either inadequate processes or the inherent constraints on communication present in the industry. Additionally, lack of formal communication processes between certain federal aviation administration organizations exist. Finding 8 Adequate processes do not exist within the federal aviation administration or in most segments of the commercial aviation industry to ensure that the lessons learned from specific experience in airplane design, manufacturing, maintenance, and flight operations are captured permanently and made readily available to the aviation industry. The failure to capture and disseminate lessons learned has allowed airplane accidents to occur for causes similar to those of past accidents. The knowledge of experienced individuals must be passed on in one form or another. This transfer of knowledge can be accomplished either formally, in documentation required by policy, or informally. However, no requirement currently exists in the federal aviation administration or in industry to ensure that the important lessons of the past are documented and used when future systems or programs are revised or developed. Without such a process, the industry’s memory fades, and critical lessons may be painfully relearned. Finding 9 There are constraints present in the aviation industry that have an inhibiting effect on the complete sharing of safety information. The federal aviation administration has made considerable progress in reducing the constraints of legal liability, enforcement action, and public disclosure of safety information. However, the operator or manufacturer may be reluctant to fully disclose all safety information in a timely manner until complete confidentiality is guaranteed. Until this is achieved, the operator or manufacturer may elect not to contribute data out of concern for potential consequences. Finding 10 There are currently no industry processes or guidance materials available that ensure that• Safety-related maintenance or operational recommendations developed by the original equipment manufacturer are evaluated by the operator for incorporation into their maintenance or operational programs.• Safety-related maintenance or operational procedures developed or modified by the operator are coordinated with the original equipment manufacturer to ensure that they do not compromise the type of design and safety standard of the airplane and its systems. original equipment manufacturer operational or maintenance recommendations are not always fully considered by operators. Some cases have been identified where this has contributed to accidents or incidents. There have also been cases where operators, without consulting with the OEM, have modified operations or maintenance procedures and practices that have, or potentially could have, impacted the safety of the type design. The challenge will be to identify the additional communication and reviews required to achieve a real safety benefit versus a non-productive communication requirement. Finding 11 The absence of adequate formal business processes between federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service limits effective communication and coordination between the two that often results in inadequate communications with the commercial aviation industry. There are informal processes that have evolved between Flight Standards and Aircraft Certification, but they are neither consistent nor complete. The lack of documented formal business processes between these offices compromises timely communication and coordination that subsequently affects the FAA’s ability to address industry safety issues effectively and industry’s ability to comply fully. Major Repairs and Modifications Once the manufacturer releases an aircraft to an operator, the operator is responsible for maintaining its continued airworthiness. Maintaining continued airworthiness involves routine maintenance, as well as repairs and alterations to the aircraft. For all of these activities, an approved configuration must be maintained. Maintenance, repair, and alteration work is accomplished using either federal aviation administration approved or accepted data, including operator and manufacturer documents. Finding 12 The airline industry and aircraft repair organizations do not have a standardized process for classifying repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft as “Major” as prescribed by applicable Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs). There is no standard process used across the commercial aviation industry or regulatory authority to determine and classify repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft as “Major” as defined by applicable FARs. The result of misclassifying a repair or alteration is the lack of adequate review, validation, and reporting of the sufficiency of repairs or alterations developed. Finding 13 Inconsistencies exist between the safety assessments conducted for the initial Type Certificate (TC) of an airplane and some of those conducted for subsequent alterations to the airplane or systems. Improved federal aviation administration and industry oversight of repair and alteration activity is needed to ensure that safety has not been compromised by subsequent repairs and alterations. Processes for the design and accomplishment of repairs and alterations, including oversight, have not always ensured the continued airworthiness of the airplane. Safety assessments prepared for certification of alterations to the airplane or systems may not meet the same standards as those for the original type certificate, although the FARs require they do so. There have been cases where the modification station or company did not have the appropriate expertise or access to original certification data to conduct adequate safety analyses. Observation 1 original equipment manufacturer and operator’s maintenance manuals, illustrated parts catalogs (IPC), and wiring diagrams needed to maintain aircraft in an airworthy configuration after incorporation of service bulletins (SB) and airworthiness directives (AD) are not always revised to reflect each aircraft’s approved configuration at the time the modifications are implemented. Maintenance manuals, IPCs, wiring diagrams, and other FAA-accepted or approved manuals are required for continued airworthiness. Incorrect data as a result of delayed revisions to user manuals can result in the release of an aircraft into service in a non-airworthy configuration. A process is needed to adequately assure that proper repairs and modifications are implemented and mandated configurations are not altered. All manuals and documents that are needed to support the correct implementation of ADs, Alternative Methods of Compliance (AMOCs), Supplemental Type Certificates (STCs), or other authorized documents should be revised to reflect the mandated aircraft design configuration in order to ensure continued airworthiness. Safety Oversight Processes federal aviation administration and industry oversight of the design, manufacture, and operation of commercial aircraft involves a large number of tasks. These oversight tasks are often the basis for the discovery of information used to establish safe practices and processes. Oversight also serves as a means to assess the adequacy of existing standards and requirements. Strong and effective industry and federal aviation administration oversight processes can be used to identify potential safety problems and accident precursors. Making improvements in this area can further enhance the present exceptional commercial aviation safety record. Finding 14 Consultant DERs have approved designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. The designated engineering representative system is generally working well, but still needs emphasis. This system has been enhanced by the addition of new processes for selection and annual review of DERs. However, some consultant designated engineering representative project approvals, which do not require federal aviation administration review, have resulted in designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations because of a lack of designated engineering representative and federal aviation administration technical expertise in certain specialized fields. Finding 15 Processes to detect and correct errors made by individuals in the design, certification, installation, repair, alteration, and operation of transport airplanes are inconsistent, allowing unacceptable errors in critical airworthiness areas. For some certification activities, there are well-ordered and effective processes; for others, no formal process exists, and existing processes may be ineffective. When there has been a lack of an effective process, individuals working independently have made errors in critical airworthiness areas; some of these errors have resulted in accidents. Observation 2 Some air carriers do more extensive oversight than others of their in-house and outsourced flight operations and maintenance activities, with major safety and economic benefits. Briefings provided by large Part 121 certificated air carrier personnel indicated that when voluntary internal quality assurance and technical analysis processes are used, significant safety and economic benefits could be realized. The effectiveness of these processes was substantiated in interviews with federal aviation administration principal inspectors with maintenance and operations oversight responsibilities. The federal aviation administration should encourage all segments of the air carrier industry to enhance their existing processes. It has been suggested that federal aviation administration incentives could be considered to influence others in the aviation community to enhance internal and external quality assurance and technical analysis activities. Conclusions Several key conclusions were drawn from the study. First, the findings and observations in this study were found to be interrelated. For example, the team identified four areas of commonality: • Information Flow• Human Factors• Lessons Learned• Accident Precursors Although other common elements could be identified and documented, the key conclusion is that the findings and observations in this study are clearly interrelated and should not be addressed in isolation. Doing so will most likely lead to less-than-optimal solutions. Second, many of the accidents reviewed during this study followed one or more previous incidents that were not acted upon because those involved in industry and government were unaware of the significance of what they had observed. Often, the reason for this lack of awareness was a failure to view the significance of the event at the airplane level rather than at the system or subsystem level. Safety awareness at the airplane level is needed for all key safety specialists, regardless of their organization, and is achieved by both proper training and adequate experience. Safety initiatives could be better coordinated and more effective if the operator, manufacturer, and federal aviation administration could achieve and maintain this level of safety awareness. Finally, traditional relationships among the regulators and industry have inherent constraints that have limited the ability to effectively identify accident precursors. Further safety improvements will require significant intra- and inter-organizational cultural changes to facilitate a more open exchange of information. Process improvements alone will not improve safety unless the leaders of government and industry and their respective organizations are committed to working together to achieve this goal of cultural change. Introduction The remarkable safety of commercial aviation is an outcome of numerous complex, interrelated processes involving government and industry organizations working together toward the common goal of aviation safety. To maintain this high level of safety, continuous effort is required among many organizations and individuals. Even with this high level of safety, accidents still occur. When accidents do occur, it is important to understand their causes and to take steps to minimize or eliminate the risk of accident recurrence. Accident prevention also requires a periodic evaluation of existing processes to identify areas for improvement. Recent accidents, such as the Alaska Airlines MD-83 in January 2000, or the Trans World Airlines Boeing 747 in July 1996, raise questions about the adequacy of airplane certification processes and the consistency by which these processes relate to the operation and maintenance of the airplane. To address these concerns, the federal aviation administration initiated the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study (CPS) in early 2001 to review the certification processes being applied in the United States. The CPS was a separate but complementary effort to the FAA’s Safer Skies initiative. Safer Skies identified accident intervention strategies (a problem focused activity), while CPS has identified process improvement opportunities (a process focused activity). These processes include: • Understanding and communicating airplane failure modes and design or certification assumptions • Ensuring airplane operations are consistent with the design or certification assumptions and safety analyses• Conducting aircraft maintenance activities• Collecting and analyzing data, including reporting and feedback mechanisms • Understanding the role and effectiveness of federal aviation administration and industry oversight The purpose of the CPS was to find process improvement opportunities and not to reinvestigate aircraft accidents or critique airplane designs. References to incidents, accidents, and designs are used solely to highlight potential process improvements in order to increase aviation safety. This is fundamental to understanding and using this report. The CPS team reviewed the processes associated with US transport airplane certification, from the original type certificate activity through the continued airworthiness processes, and examined how these activities interrelate with in-service maintenance and operations programs, as depicted in Figure 2. The CPS also focused on the information paths between certification, operations, and maintenance processes, as depicted in Figure 3. Findings and observations were continuously reviewed against this diagram to ensure they were applicable to the CPS charter. Development of Study Focus Areas The CPS team accepted the challenge of a one-year study of the airplane certification and in-service life cycle processes. While some reference material involved foreign-manufactured airplanes, the study focused primarily on US-certificated transport airplanes. During the initial phase of this study, the team analyzed historical reports, accident case studies, numerous briefings by industry subject matter experts, and reviews of applicable regulatory materials. The CPS team used a top-down and bottom-up analytical approach to better understand the processes related to the certification and life cycle operation of large commercial aircraft. Following a detailed screening activity, five focus areas were identified. These five focus areas formed the basis of the Certification Process Study:• Airplane Safety Assurance Processes• Aviation Safety Data Management• Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces• Major Repairs and Modifications• Safety Oversight Processes Findings and observations were developed and validated from these focus areas. Findings were defined as those results that can be well substantiated and justified with data. Observations are those items that were not as fully substantiated or justified with data due to time and resource constraints. Nevertheless, observations document areas where opportunities exist for process improvements and are not considered less important than findings. The bottom-up review of reference material, the top-down funneling into focus areas, and the development of findings and observations are depicted in Figure 4. Findings and Observations The following section of the report contains the findings and observations of the CPS team. They are arranged by chapters, each chapter covering one of the five study topics. The order and numbering of the chapters and findings do not imply any level of importance or priority. Each chapter also provides a high-level discussion of the processes the CPS team found to be significant to the certification processes in the respective subject area. The reader is cautioned against considering any finding as stand-alone and is encouraged to recognize their interrelationship to other findings and observations in order to gain a better understanding of the certification processes and the areas identified for improvement. Appendix B provides a summary of the findings and observations that resulted from the study. Airplane Safety Assurance Processes There are many elements to the safety assurance of commercial airplanes. Included among these are the formal safety assessments performed to support type certification and the continuing adherence to essential operations and maintenance procedures for the life of the airplane. The design team of a new airplane must ensure that all the safety and performance requirements are met. This requires a development assurance process to track the design as it evolves. The airplane safety assessment process can be thought of as a part of this design and development assurance process. As with all design assurance processes, for the safety assessment process to be effective, it must be traced through the entire life cycle of the product. During the development of new airplanes, safety assessments are prepared to ensure that the airplane will meet all the safety standards and requirements imposed by the regulatory authorities and by the manufacturer. These assessments include several related analyses, which should be completed in stages as the development progresses, i.e., they are part of the design and development assurance process. The assessments can be divided into two main functional areas: systems and structures, with propulsion included in both areas. Over the past 40 years, technologies have changed, and systems have become much more interdependent and integrated. Systems now routinely include circuits with microprocessors, programmable logic devices, and, in a few cases, fiber optics. With this increasing complexity, it becomes difficult to determine (particularly for the regulatory authorities) the independence of the systems providing critical functions. Therefore, it is imperative to have a sound safety assessment methodology to ensure that failure conditions have been adequately addressed. The certification regulations and associated guidance material have also been in a continual state of development as more is learned about the causes of accidents, and better processes have been identified for conducting safety assessments. Although excellent work has been done to improve the quality of the safety assurance processes, there are still some weaknesses that will need attention. Human error is still listed as one of the most frequent contributors to accidents. There is no single area on which to focus to reduce these errors. It will require attention to all the human interfaces involved in the design, operation, and maintenance of an airplane. In the systems area, guidance is provided to the manufacturers in the form of advisory circulars, Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) documents, and Society of Automotive Engineers Aerospace Recommended Practices (SAE ARPs). society of automotive engineers ARPs 4761 and 4754 provide excellent guidance to the manufacturers on various topics that need to be addressed in the system safety assessments. However, there are no methods available to evaluate the probability of human error in the operation and maintenance of a particular system design, and existing qualitative methods are not very satisfactory. Validation and communication of the assumptions that are used during the development of the airplane, relative to the eventual maintenance and operation of the airplane in service, are other problem areas. Some of the assumptions that are critical to flight safety are not always well documented. A significant problem appears to be the inadvertent compromise of safety during the repair or alteration of the airplane as a result of the lack of awareness of some of the original design constraints. Human performance is still the dominant factor in accidents: Finding 1 • The processes used to determine and validate human responses to failure and methods to include human responses in safety assessments need to be improved.• Design techniques, safety assessments, and regulations do not adequately address the subject of human error in design or in operations and maintenance. Human Factors Issues in Design, Operations, and Maintenance Human errors continue to dominate as a contributing factor in accidents, being listed in approximately 80% of all transport airplane accidents in the past decade. Flight crew errors are listed as the primary cause in 66% of the accidents [1]. Despite the introduction of protective devices or systems, e.g., Ground Proximity Warning System (GPWS), Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS), these percentages have remained relatively unchanged. The industry challenge is to develop airplanes and procedures that are less likely to result in operator error and that are more tolerant of operator errors when they do occur.There are two basic types of human error that can affect the safe operation of an airplane:• Incorrect response after malfunction • Incorrect actions with no malfunction A common assumption in the regulations, advisory circulars, and safety assessments is that single failures, particularly when accompanied with a failure indication, can be detected by the flight crew and, through the use of redundant systems and alternate operating procedures, the flight can be safely continued. In the vast majority of cases, this assumption is correct. However, there are some cases where single failures, which were assumed to cause minor failure effects, have resulted in accidents. Single Failure Assumed To Cause Minor Failure Effects Resulted In Accident A recent example is the Boeing 757-200 operated by Birgenair on February 6, 1996 [2]. The plane crashed at night in visual meteorological conditions (VMC), shortly after takeoff from Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic. Data from the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR) indicated that the captain's air speed indicator displayed an air speed that was incorrect during the takeoff roll and the captain recognized this fact. The incorrect airspeed display was consistent with the effects of a blocked pitot pressure sensor. At an altitude of 7000 feet, the captain's airspeed indicator displayed 350 knots and an overspeed warning occurred. This was followed immediately by activation of the stall warning system stick shaker. Although the failed indicator was recognized during the takeoff roll and two other correctly functioning airspeed displays were available to the flight crew, flight crew confusion about airspeed, the proper thrust setting, and the proper pitch attitude resulted in a stall followed by a descent and crash into the Atlantic Ocean. Shortly after this accident, an Aeroperu Boeing 757 crashed [3] after simultaneous overspeed warnings and stall warnings resulting from a failure to remove tape from the static ports after cleaning the airplane. In each accident, errors by both the ground crew and the flight crew were contributory factors. Failure of Single Attitude Display The failure of a single attitude display is assumed to be either minor or major depending on the phase of flight and if a failure indication is provided. Accidents are not assumed to occur as the result of minor or major failure conditions. Nevertheless, a number of accidents have occurred following the failure of a single attitude display. For example: A Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 crashed 55 seconds after takeoff from Stansted Airport in the UK on December 22, 1999 [4]. The flight crew failed to recognize and correctly respond to faulty roll attitude information displayed on the captain’s Attitude Director Indicator (ADI), despite numerous (at least 14) alerts from the Instrument Comparator Buzzer (ICB) and two calls of “bank” by the flight engineer. The airplane impacted the ground in a 90-degree left bank with a 40-degree nose down pitch attitude and all engines operatingat takeoff power. On the previous flight with a different flight crew, the captain recognized a problem with his Attitude Direct Indicator and transferred flying duty to the first officer before selecting the alternate Inertial Navigation System (INS), which corrected the roll attitude display problem. Maintenance was informed of the problem with the captain's Attitude Direct Indicator, but may not have corrected the problem prior to the next flight. Incorrect Response After Malfunction On January 8, 1989, a British Midland Airways Boeing 737-400 suffered a partial fan blade loss in the left engine at flight level (FL) 283 and crashed 19 minutes later, short of a runway at Kegworth, UK [5]. After number one engine failure, a severe vibration was felt accompanied by some engine surges and fumes in the cockpit, but the crew misinterpreted data which was correctly displayed and hastily decided that number two was the faulty engine. After throttling back the number two engine, the vibration seemed to be reduced and then fuel was cut off from the engine. In the non-normal checklist, severe vibration does not necessitate an engine shutdown nor does presence of smoke or fumes in the cockpit. The Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) made four recommendations relative to the engine instrument displays. When a thrust reverser deployed during takeoff on TAM flight 402, a Fokker-100, on October 31, 1996, the thrust reverser interlock cable retarded the throttle lever, as intended [6]. The flight crew assumed that this was caused by an autothrottle system failure. The captain forced the throttle lever forward overcoming the interlock and causing the right engine to go to full thrust with the thrust reverser deployed. The resulting asymmetric force caused a loss of control and the airplane crashed. Other accidents following problems that would not normally be considered catastrophic are referenced here without elaboration: • Failures of a single attitude indicator or spatial disorientation of the pilot: Air India Boeing 747 (1978) [7], Air Transport International DC-8 (1992) [8], and Zantop International Airline L-188 (1984) [9]. • False stall warning during takeoff roll: TWA L-1011 [10]. • Engine failure during takeoff: Midwest Express Airlines DC-9 [11]. The ability of the flight crew to react correctly to system failures seems to have a large variance, which is difficult to evaluate correctly using currently available safety assessment methods. This also makes it difficult to determine the best display techniques to be used to minimize risk. Incorrect Actions With No Malfunction Human error that contributed to accidents of fully functional aircraft or created a fault leading to an accident is a recurring theme and is, in fact, much more common than those following an airplane malfunction. Of particular concern to the airplane designer are the human errors that may be induced by the system design details of a particular model. Some examples include: Air Inter 148, an A320, crashed at Strasbourg in 1992 during an approach to landing [12]. The flight crew inadvertently selected 3300 fpm descent rate rather than 3.3 degree flight path angle because of misuse of a switchable controller which allowed selection of either flight path angle or rate of descent. The Bureau of Enquetes-ccidents noted that the display of selected information was ambiguous on the control panel and inconsistent with the displayed information on the primary flight isplay—a classic human factors issue.A Delta Airlines Boeing 767 incident occurred shortly after takeoff from Los Angeles in 1987 [13]. The flight crew activated fuel cut-off switches rather than the electronic engine controller (EEC) switches which were adjacent to them. Recovery was accomplished after engine relight at 500 ft. This is another example of design (switch layout) contributing to a nearly catastrophic pilot error. A China Airlines A300 crashed during approach to Nagoya, Japan, on April 26, 1994 [14]. Go around mode was inadvertently selected and the First Officer tried to continue the approach by overriding the autopilot. The autopilot in this mode did not disconnect as it would have done on most other airplanes. The stabilizer ran to the extreme nose up position resulting in airplane stall and crash. Another class of human factors accidents is more difficult to categorize because of the broad range of root causes. A few representative examples follow:American Airlines Flight 191, a DC-10, crashed at Chicago in 1979 shortly after takeoff [15]. During takeoff rotation the left engine and pylon assembly and part of the wing leading edge separated and fell to the runway. Collateral damage resulted in loss of the left wing outboard leading edge slats and some warning systems. The cause of the engine separation was traced to an improper procedure used for replacement of the engine which resulted in damage to strut mounts. McDonnell Douglas had specified in its original maintenance procedures and subsequent service bulletins that the engine must be separated from the pylon before the pylon is removed from the wing. However, two major carriers developed procedures to remove the engine and pylon as a single unit using a forklift. This procedure required extreme precision to avoid damage to the spherical support joints, the significance of which was not realized by the maintenance and engineering personnel. Approval was neither sought nor required from the manufacturer or FAA. Eastern Airlines Flight 855, an L-1011, took off from Miami on May 5th, 1983, after maintenance had replaced the oil chip detector plugs on all three engines without installing the “O” rings [16]. The airplane landed safely but with two engines failed and the third engine in imminent anger of failure. Federal Express Flight 14, an MD-11, crashed during a landing at Newark, NJ on July 31, 1997, as a result of overcontrol during flare by the captain, which resulted in a bounce and a hard landing that fractured the right wing of the airplane [17]. A Continental DC-9-32 at Houston, TX landed with the landing gear retracted on February 19, 1996, as a result of the failure of the flight crew to follow the check list and turn on hydraulic power to operate the landing gear [18]. Air Canada Flight 646, a Canadair Regional Jet, at Fredericton, Nova Scotia in 1995 [19] crashed when the flight crew initiated a go-around from a destabilized, idle thrust approach in low visibility. The Transport Safety Board of Canada (TSB) noted that the sequential nature of the steps in the go-around procedure, which placed disproportionate emphasis on the flight director, contributed to inadequate monitoring of the airspeed. The flight director's guidance was not appropriate for the low energy state of the aircraft, nor was the aircraft's response from the low energy condition similar to that experienced by the crew during training. In the case of failed pitot and barometric pressure sensors, particularly if multiple sensors are blocked, a very difficult and confusing condition for the flight crew will exist. There may be multiple warning indications simultaneously indicating underspeed and overspeed conditions in addition to erroneous displays of airspeed, altitude, and vertical speed to both pilots. This condition, which has caused several fatal accidents, is considered to be a catastrophic failure condition. A Northwest Airlines Boeing 727 crashed near Bear Mountain, NY, as a result of ice blockage of all pitot sensors on December 1, 1974 [20]. The airplane encountered icing conditions and the flight crew had not activated pitot heat. Despite rule changes issued because of this accident that require alerting and caution indications for pitot heat failure, on March 2, 1994, a ontinental Airlines MD-82 had an accident because of an unsuccessful high speed rejected takeoff (RTO) (initiated at a speed 5 knots above takeoff decision speed V1) as a result of pitot sensors blocked with ice or snow [21]. The flight crew had interrupted the takeoff checklist and did not turn on the pitot heat system. In each of these accidents, the failure of the sensors was the result of flight crew failure to activate pitot heat.These accidents may point to human factors deficiencies in the design of the flight deck systems or in the various manuals and procedures. The erroneous response by the flight crew following a malfunction is partially addressed by the regulations in 14 code of federal regulations §25.1309 (c), which states: Warning information must be provided to alert the crew to unsafe operating conditions, and to enable them to take appropriate corrective action. Systems, controls, and associated monitoring and warning means must be designed to minimize crew errors which could create additional hazards. There is no such regulatory design requirement to minimize errors by maintenance personnel; however, the federal aviation administration does have a guidance document, Human Factors Guide for Aviation Maintenance [22]. This federal aviation administration document contains human factors information and guidance for personnel at various levels of responsibility in aviation maintenance. One human factors specialist employed by the federal aviation administration Transport Airplane Directorate developed a possible approach to improve this situation with a proposed method of ranking system designs for no credit, partial credit, or full credit in safety assessments based on the ease or difficulty of the flight crew to detect, decide, and take action in response to failures of the system [23]. This methodology, or any other similar approach, would require a significant effort to verify its effectiveness before it could be implemented. A tool, appropriately named Procedural Event Analysis Tool (PEAT), has been found useful during development of the flight deck systems and and procedures. There is very limited guidance, either in the advisory circulars or the society of automotive engineers ARPs used for initial type certification, to ensure that human performance is adequately considered during the development of the airplane design or for development of the training programs. Draft 12 of society of automotive engineers Aerospace Recommended Practice 5150 [24], which has not yet been released, refers to two tools available for improvement of performance of flight and ground crews. These are the Maintenance Error Decision airport information desk (MEDA) and he Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA) tool. However, no mention is made in Aerospace Recommended Practice 5150 of human factors considerations in the design of modified equipment. The federal aviation administration Human Factors Team Report [25] included 51 recommendations, many of which also pertain to the issues discussed above. The report focused on the interfaces between the flight crews and modern flight deck systems. The following interrelated deficiencies were identified in the current aviation system: • Insufficient communication and coordination • Inadequate processes used for addressing human performance issues in design, training, and regulatory functions • Insufficient criteria, methods, and tools for design, training, and evaluation • Insufficient knowledge and skills • Insufficient understanding and consideration of cultural differences in design, training, operations, and evaluation If significant strides are to be made in lowering the accident rates, a much better understanding of the issues affecting human performance is required. The airplane designers will be challenged to develop systems which are less error prone. Procedures will also have to be more explicit and more robust with respect to the range of skills and techniques of operations and maintenance personnel. This area would benefit from a better understanding of lessons learned and a sharing of best practices throughout the industry (see Finding 8). Finding 2 There is no reliable process to ensure that assumptions made in the safety assessments are valid with respect to operations and maintenance activities, and that operators are aware of these assumptions when developing their operations and maintenance procedures. In addition, certification standards may not reflect the actual operating environment. Correlation of Safety Assessment Assumptions with Operations and Maintenance Practices The preparation of a Functional Hazard Assessment and Fault Tree Analysis requires assumptions about the ways in which the airplane will be operated and maintained. The use of such assumptions should be justified by supporting data and should be explicitly stated and effectively disseminated to all operators, maintainers, and modification centers dealing with that aircraft. Assumptions are made relative to:• Aircraft environmental conditions (ice, wind, lightning, electromagnetic interference, temperatures, bird strikes, etc.)• Air traffic environment (domestic and foreign)• Operating conditions and procedures• Maintenance procedures • Training programs During the 1990s several examples of inaccurate certification assumptions emerged. The following case studies will illustrate the finding. Wheel Brake Certification In the 1990 Special Investigation Report Brake Performance of the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 During High Speed, High Energy Rejected Takeoffs [26], the national transportation safety board concluded that: Current Federal regulations do not require setting proper brake wear limits based on the amount of remaining brake friction material necessary to assure continuous brake capability during a maximum energy RTO. They found that brake wear limits were determined by tests conducted using new brakes. This procedure ignored the fact that the overwhelming majority of air carrier operations are conducted with less-than-new brake linings. The applicability of data derived from the performance of new brakes to all operations was shown to be deficient. Further, the national transportation safety board found that, in the case of the DC-10, brake performance data for takeoff considerations were developed by using data from landing tests only. This omitted acceleration effects occurring during reduction from takeoff thrust setting. Although this case has been addressed by changes in the certification criteria, the original criteria which allowed the use of new brakes, and which failed to account for the effects of thrust reduction after brake application during RTO, was not well correlated with actual operating conditions. In-flight Icing Certification Criteria Two accidents in recent years have highlighted inconsistencies between the icing certification criteria and the actual operating environment. The Simmons ATR-72 accident at Roselawn, Indiana, in October 1994 [27] involved an airplane that met the most advanced icing certification standard available at that time, yet the design and the standard did not include consideration of the effects of water droplets larger than those defined in the icing standard contained in 14 code of federal regulations Part 25, Appendix C. The accident analysis determined that the aircraft encountered a supercooled large droplet environment and that the resulting ice shape led to a loss of control. When Appendix C was developed, such environments were suspected but the measurement equipment to distinguish them did not exist. Subsequent research has confirmed that such environments are more common than previously thought. The national transportation safety board stated: Contributing to the accident were: . . . The FAA’s failure to ensure that aircraft icing conditions and federal aviation administration published aircraft icing information adequately accounted for the hazards that can result from flight in freezing rain and other icing conditions not specified in 14 code of federal regulations 25 Appendix C. In the report on Comair EMB-120, an accident that took place at Monroe, Michigan in January 1997 [28], the national transportation safety board stated: The icing certification process has been inadequate because it has not required manufacturers to demonstrate the airplane’s flight handling and stall characteristics under a sufficiently realistic range of adverse ice accretion/flight handling conditions. These two accidents, as well as a number of well-documented incidents, have raised significant questions about the icing engineering standard itself and about the assumptions used when employing the standard in design and certification. While considerable industry effort is being expended to address these questions (for example, the Ice Protection Harmonization Working Group), both accidents highlight different aspects of certification criteria which did not reflect the actual environment. Further, the investigations suggested that the knowledge of icing certification possessed by operators and flight crews did not include an understanding of what had or had not been accomplished in icing certification. Low EnergyGo-Around Certification Following the accident involving Air Canada Flight 646 at Fredericton in 1997 [29], the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) noted some discrepancies between the certification process and the published material available to operators with respect to go-arounds. The aircraft crashed after ttempting a low energy (engines at idle power) go-around from an unstabilized instrument approach. The TSB etermined that when the go-around was initiated, the aircraft was outside of the flight envelope demonstrated during the certification process. Normally, the certification process evaluates the go-around maneuver from a stabilized approach; in this case, the approach was not stabilized. This difference was not apparent to the operator or flight crew. The SB found that: The conditions under which the go-arounds are demonstrated for aircraft certification do not form part of the documentation that leads to aircraft limitations or boundaries for the go-around procedure; this contributed to these factors not being taken into account when the go-around procedures were incorporated in aircraft and training manuals. The TSB recognized that it might be very difficult for the manufacturer to provide information indicating when a safe go-around could not be expected. Nonetheless, they suggested that: Operators and pilots could be provided with the go-around conditions related to certification so an interpretation of what may not be possible could be made. Crosswind Landing Certification Following the accident involving Transavia Flight 462, a Boeing 757, at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport (1997), an extensive inquiry into crosswind certification and operations was made [30]. The aircraft crashed during landing while experiencing a wind reported by the tower to be 240 degrees at 30 knots, maximum 43 knots, resulting in a crosswind component of 35 knots. The flight management system (FMS) wind reading at 600 feet was 240 degrees at 50 knots. The investigation by Dutch authorities questioned why the flight crew had not considered a go-around. They discovered that the maximum demonstrated crosswind of 30 knots was not considered limiting by Transavia standard operating procedures. The report stated that, By not establishing a clear and definite crosswind limit in the Transavia Operations Manual a defense barrier against unsafe operations was lost. An extensive inquiry into crosswind certification and operations was made by the Dutch National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR) [31]. Their report stated that: . . . during this final phase of the approach, the gust of wind coupled with the turbulence induced a significant change in both wind speed and direction resulting in a crosswind in excess of 50 knots. Prior to that the crosswind was 25 to 30 knots. When the NLR examined FAR/Joint Airworthiness Requirements 25.23, Wind Velocities, they pointed out that: When Joint Airworthiness Requirements/Federal Aviation Regulation25.237 is examined carefully, the following can be noticed: • Only dry runways have to be considered. • It is not clear if the wind speed includes gusts or not. • No crosswind limits have to be established, only demonstrated values. They further looked at the guidance for certification to Federal Aviation Regulation25.237 provided in Advisory Circular 25-7. They concluded that: There are two possibilities on how to note crosswinds in the Airplane Flight Manual. If the demonstrated crosswind is not considered to be a limiting value for aircraft handling characteristics, this demonstrated value can be placed as information in the Airplane Flight Manual. Higher crosswinds are then allowed when the applicable operational requirements and the airline specification allow it. If he demonstrated crosswind is considered to be a maximum limiting value up to which it is safe to operate the aircraft, the demonstrated crosswind value will appear as a limiting value in the Airplane Flight Manual. It is not allowed to operate the aircraft beyond this crosswind. For practically all aircraft certified by the federal aviation administration the demonstrated crosswind is not regarded as limiting by the federal aviation administration test pilots. The Dutch authorities noted, in the conclusions section of the Transavia Flight 264 accident report, that: There is a reasonable probability that an actually encountered wind during landing deviates from the reported wind. This uncertainty warrants substantial margins to theoretical wind limitations when operating in crosswind. Much as was the case in the Canadian investigation at Fredericton, it appears that what was actually accomplished in certification was not clear to the operator when company procedures were developed. With respect to crosswind, the NLR also pointed out that this weak understanding of crosswind certification also applies to airport authorities when they are establishing preferred runway criteria. This example leads to the conclusion that the information regarding the boundaries of what was shown during certification may not be adequately communicated to prevent the development and approval of local interpretations, procedures and operating techniques, which imply a basis in certification beyond what was actually accomplished. Maintenance Procedures Assumptions about the effectiveness of maintenance practices to protect the safety of the airplane were identified as a problem after the Alaska Flight 261 accident off Point Mugu, CA in January 2000 [32]. The NTSB, in their preliminary report, stated: . . . engineers from the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group testified that wear of the acme nut is normal and expected and is taken into account by its “robust” design. They further indicated that to maintain the horizontal stabilizertrim system’s structural integrity, acme nut thread wear must be managed through; 1) the regular application of lubrication and, 2) an inspection program to monitor the wear. Boeing engineers acknowledged that, without such maintenance intervention, the type design could be compromised and the results could be catastrophic.It would appear that better identification (see Finding 4) and tighter monitoring might be required of those maintenance practices which could adversely affect the integrity of flight critical functions. Airplane safety was based on the assumption that regular maintenance would preclude excessive wear of this critical part. It will always be necessary to make assumptions in the safety analyses; however, where possible, those assumptions may need to be validated by actual experience and periodically revisited to ensure that they reflect the full range of environments and operators of the fleet. Finding 3 A more robust approach to design and a process that challenges the assumptions made in the safety analysis of flight critical functions is necessary in situations where a few failures (2 or 3) could result in a catastrophic event. Robust Safety Assessments and Design for Critical Functions Safety analyses are accomplished to show that catastrophic events are not expected to occur in the life of an airplane fleet and that lesser events are acceptably unlikely. These analyses are done with the facts and data available at the time, and by making some fundamental assumptions about the behavior of the airplane and its systems, and the people who build, maintain, and operate the airplanes for the life of the fleet. However, a number of events have occurred indicating that the ability to predict correctly all catastrophic failure scenarios is limited. In the early stages of airplane development, designers often have an opportunity to incorporate additional afeguards or use an alternative approach for relatively little added cost in an effort to provide a more robust system.Catastrophic events such as thrust reverser deployment in flight, and fuel tank explosions, have, as one root cause, an incorrect assumption that made the safety analysis invalid. In the case of the thrust reverser deployment, the assumption was that the airplane was controllable in the event of such a deployment. During the development of the Boeing 767, this was demonstrated in flight, but only at low speed with thrust at idle. This was assumed to be the worst condition, erroneously, as found later in the case of Lauda Air in Thailand (1991) [33] In the case of fuel tank explosions, the assumption was that the design, operation, and maintenance practices would prevent ignition sources from being present in the tank throughout the life of the fleet. A second assumption was that the tank could be flammable at any time and thus there was no need to examine the probability of the tank being flammable. The combination of these assumptions created a false confidence in the success of the designs. In reality, some fuel tanks are not flammable for considerable portions of the fleet life, preventing explosions but also masking the failure to prevent ignition sources from being present in the tanks. Certain tanks are flammable for much longer periods, and the failure to keep ignition sources out of the tank may have led to three center tank explosions in the last eleven years. In both of these examples (thrust reversers and fuel tanks), the design was shown to comply with the certification requirements in place at the time of certification, but only because the assumptions were considered to be valid. More in-depth design reviews to question the underlying assumptions may have found these issues. On recent programs, design reviews have included experienced design, operations, and maintenance personnel. These reviews provide an opportunity to challenge the assumptions and determine if a more robust design could be implemented that would provide additional protection. This approach could help to provide protection from failure modes or human actions that were not correctly predicted by analysis. Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) issued NPA 25F-281 in October 1998 [34]. This document contains the proposed advisory material for Joint Airworthiness Requirements 25.1309 and points out the following, in paragraph 11(h) on page 25 (Justifications of Assumptions, Data Sources and Analytical Techniques):Any analysis is only as accurate as the assumptions, data, and analytical techniques it uses. Therefore, to show compliance with the requirements, the underlying assumptions, data and analytic techniques should be identified and justified to assure that the conclusions of the analysis were valid. Variability may be inherent in elements such as failure modes, failure effects, failure rates, failure probability distribution functions, failure exposure times, failure detection methods, fault independence, and limitation of analytical methods, processes, and assumptions. The justification of the assumptions made with respect to the above items should be an integral part of the analysis. Assumptions can be validated by using experience with identical or similar systems or components with due allowance made for differences of design, duty cycle or environment. Where it is not possible to fully justify the adequacy of the safety analysis and where data or assumptions are critical to the acceptability of the Failure Condition, extra conservatism should be built into either the analysis or the design. Alternatively any uncertainty in the data and assumptions should be evaluated to the degree necessary to demonstrate that the analysis conclusions are insensitive to that uncertainty. The federal aviation administration is currently drafting an update to Advisory Circular 25.1309 [35] to support harmonization with the joint aviation authority document.Finding 3 suggests that the failure analysis should be examined in much more depth when the consequences of a failure or combination of one, two, or three failures may be an immediate or unavoidable loss of the airplane. The underlying assumptions of the analysis must be examined to determine if the effect of an incorrect assumption is loss of the airplane. Assumptions on future maintenance, such as separation of critical wiring, have also been incorrect. Both versions of the advisory circulars (ACs) essentially suggest that extra caution be taken in the use of data and assumptions during the design and analysis processes. Every assumption should be examined to understand the sensitivity of the assumption on the results. Where such sensitivity does exist, then the design should be changed to reduce the sensitivity. Similarly, a failure to identify a specific failure mode can occur, particularly when the analysis involves multiple failure paths. One unanticipated failure mode may occur and have a major effect on the airplane safety. In this case it should be addressed by looking at the key protective features and determine if additional safeguards are needed. Reducing fuel flammability is an example of an additional mitigation factor that could reduce the criticality of a failure, which could produce an ignition source in the fuel tanks.One example of a design that added capability well beyond the 14 code of federal regulations §25.1309 requirements is the Boeing 777 flight control system (FCS). The system was designed with several layers of redundancy in the computational paths (both digital and analog), ensuring loss of “get-home” capability would be well beyond extremely improbable. In addition, electrical power for the Flight Control System was protected by use of two dedicated permanent magnet generators on each engine, backed up by the main electrical power buses, the main battery, and a ram air turbine.Many assumptions are historic in nature, justified by “we’ve always done it this way.” These assumptions tend to be so buried in the analysis that the analyst may not recognize them as assumptions. Conversely, an assumption based on historical precedent may be entirely valid but is changed simply because the data supporting it have been lost over time. This assumption can be inappropriate if the original assumption was correct. A related finding (see Finding 8) focuses on the failure of industry to carry forward an understanding of historical bases behind regulations, requirements, and best practices.This finding highlights the need to examine every safety analysis assumption for its impact on the overall safety of the airplane. Where any assumption has a major effect on the outcome, the analysis and design should address the potential for the assumption being wrong. Risk can often be reduced by selection of a relatively conservative design approach with respect to systems with potentially catastrophic failure consequences. Flight Critical Systems and Structures Airplane design decisions are made with consideration of their impact on both systems and structures. Understanding the design assumptions and the interactions of the safety critical features is essential to maintaining the integrity of the airplane for safe operation. These decisions, assumptions, and interactions must be understood individually and collectively before any subsequent change, modification, or repair is made to the airplane or to its components. The design of an airplane requires making numerous choices among different design approaches. These choices, from the highest level, such as the number of engines, down to the smallest component level, such as what kind of fastener to use, are made by specialists in the OEMs. Based on their engineering knowledge, experience, and analyses, these design decisions and features allow the airplane to be used safely for its intended purpose.The final design must meet the requirements of the certification authorities and the design standards of the OEM, but there is no standard means, nor should there be, to design an airplane or its specific components. Different means and various assumptions are made down to the most detailed aspect of the design. These assumptions are typically well documented and maintained in the OEM’s internal documents and are well understood by the responsible designers. In recent years many non-OEM changes, modifications, or repairs were made without original equipment manufacturer involvement or data were not available at the time of the change, modification, or repair. This practice could potentially undermine the integrity of the changed, modified, or repaired airplane or the component to a point that might compromise safety.Two examples where this process failed and allowed new hazards into the original system by the introduction of new wiring are: • Swissair MD-11 entertainment system installation where the power supply used by the supplemental type certificate installation did not conform to the OEM’s design philosophy and resulted in the crew’s inability to turn off the system [36] • Philippine Airlines Boeing 737 fuel tank wiring where the installation of a logo light wire run used the same wire run as for the fuel tank float switch [37] Structural changes or alterations where the modifying company did not know the specific limitations of the original design have also been an issue. These include: • Certain passenger-to-cargo modifications by other than OEMs [38] • The thermal protection of repaired fuel pumps for an operator’s MD-11’s, where the thermal fuses were incorrectly installed and a subsequent pump failure was not protected by the thermal fuses [39] Changes developed without original equipment manufacturer involvement and without an understanding of the original certification assumptions add risk because the modifier, maintainer, or operator is not aware of the criticality of the original type design. It is difficult for operators to develop such procedures in accordance with those design constraints because frequently only a few specialists at the original equipment manufacturer may understand the underlying safety issues.14 code of federal regulations §25.981(b), adopted in 2001, addresses the placard issue for fuel systems as follows:Visible means must be placed in the area of the airplane where maintenance, repairs, or alterations may violate the critical design configuration control limitations.The objective of this requirement is to provide information to maintenance, repair, or modification personnel to minimize errors that could increase the hazards to the airplane. Protection of other flight critical functions in a similar manner would be beneficial. An innovative approach is required to ensure that appropriate procedures, manuals, and placards communicate the relevant safety information so that maintenance, operations, alterations, and repairs can be made with cognizance of the safety features of the original design. This approach would have the following potential benefits:• Provide a method for identification of safety critical features• Ensure that important safety critical design features are not changed without recognition of the effect on safety.• Protect safety critical installations from inadvertent degradation during maintenance, alterations, and repair activities.• Provide a standard for traceability of safety requirements, design constraints, test, and analysis. This finding has a very strong relationship with Findings 10 and 13. Structural Safety Assessment 14 code of federal regulations §25.571 requirements, which were recodified in 1965 from Civil Air Regulations 4b.270, have evolved throughout the past forty years. This regulation, in part, protects the aircraft structures from the adverse effects of operational conditions. Before 1978, Civil Air Regulations 4b.270 and 14 code of federal regulations §25.571 required that airplane structures whose failure could result in catastrophic failure of the airplane be evaluated under the provisions of either fatigue strength or fail-safe strength requirements. If the structure was not demonstrated to withstand the repeated loads of variable magnitude expected in service, it had to be fail-safe. A fail-safe structure is one in which catastrophic failure or excessive structural deformation that could adversely affect the flight characteristics of the airplane are not probable after fatigue failure or obvious partial failure of a single primary structural element (PSE). After these types of failures of a single PSE, the remaining structure must be able to withstand static loads corresponding to the required residual strength loads. If the concept of fail-safe was impractical, structures were certified using the safe-life concept. Most common examples of structures that have been certified to safe-life were landing gear components and structure associated with control surfaces.The Dan-Air Flight 039 Boeing 707 accident on May 14, 1977 [40], proved that these concepts were inadequate, and on October 5, 1978, Amendment 25-45 of the rule was issued. In this accident, evidence of simultaneous crack nucleation and propagation from colinear holes, which operated at or near the same stress level, linked up and caused the starboard horizontal stabilizer to break off the airplane. Amendment 25-45 added the concept called damage tolerance to the rule. Damage tolerance is the attribute of the structure that permits it to retain its required residual strength for a period of use after the structure has sustained a given level of fatigue, corrosion, or discrete source damage. Amendment 25-45 requires that a damage tolerance assessment of the structure be accomplished to determine the most probable location of the damage and to provide an inspection program that requires directed inspections of critical structure. The damage tolerance assessment philosophy essentially replaced the fail-safe and safe-life design philosophies.In April 1988, a high-cycle Aloha Airlines Boeing 737 experienced an in-flight explosive decompression of the fuselage caused by the undetected presence of widespread fatigue damage (WFD) [41]. This accident increased the concern about the airworthiness of high numbers of aging aircraft, which were otherwise not being inspected for this type of damage. As a result of this accident, several aging aircraft initiatives were launched by the federal aviation administration and industry: • Publication of select service bulletins describing necessary modifications and inspections • Development of inspection and prevention programs to address corrosion • Development of generic structural maintenance program guidelines for aging airplanes • Review and update of supplemental structural inspection documents (SSIDS) that describe programs to detect fatigue cracking• Assessment of damage tolerance of structural repairs • Development of program to preclude WFD in the fleet For large transport airplanes, most of the first five initiatives have been accomplished. The federal aviation administration is working on rulemaking currently to mandate the last initiative [42]. Amendment 25-72 removed the words ‘fail-safe’ from the rule. Additionally, the Airworthiness Assurance Working Group (AAWG) recommended that industry initiate programs to eliminate WFD from all affected airplane models. Amendment 25-96, later mandated, among other things, that manufacturers consider WFD in areas that are prone to this type of damage. This amendment also requires the manufacturer to conduct a full-scale fatigue test of each new airplane to demonstrate that WFD will not occur within the Design Service Goal of the airplane. Aviation Safety Data Management Numerous interviews with federal aviation administration data management personnel were conducted. Because of the CPS one-year charter time constraint, the focus was on federal aviation administration data management programs only rather than on those of the entire industry. Finding 5 illustrates the primary federal aviation administration data management issue: too many independent programs are without effective inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Each program is resource-limited, and when asked if programs were focusing on identifying accident precursor events, the answer was generally no. Findings 6 and 7 address data definition and reporting requirements and the need for effective data management methodologies and tools. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO), or an equivalent organization, should coordinate the various activities of the federal aviation administration data management program. The following publications define the FAA’s data management and information technology (IT) programs: • federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, federal aviation administration Data Management (June 20, 2001)• federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy (September 21, 1999) • federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy, (September 22, 1999) These publications are significant and should be implemented promptly before technical or philosophical obsolescence becomes an issue. The FAA’s efforts run the risk of falling into the trap noted in federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy: There is general agreement that the federal aviation administration should implement a corporate data management program, but few public or private organizations have successfully done so. Most efforts fail because they are too broad in scope, lack commitment, and grossly underestimate resource requirements. Improving Aircraft Safety (The Low Report)[1] identified these same findings over 20 years ago, and they are still relevant today. Finding 5 Multiple FAA-sponsored data collection and analysis programs exist without adequate inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Coordination of Data Management Systems Effective data management requires clearly defined lines of business (LOBs) that provide customers with meaningful and timely products to maintain and improve commercial air safety. The complexity and scope of these efforts require effective program management from the highest levels of the federal aviation administration to the field stations. Anything less than a fully integrated and coordinated management structure runs the risk of inefficient resource use and the possibility that intervention opportunities to prevent accidents will be missed. The following federal aviation administration data collection and analysis programs (see Glossary for additional definitions) were reviewed either in person or by teleconference:• Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP)• Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS)• Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP)• federal aviation administration Chief Information Office (AIO)• Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA)• Global Aviation Information Network (GAIN)• National Aviation Safety Data Analysis Center (NASDAC) • Program Tracking and Reporting System (PTRS)• Safety Performance Analysis System (SPAS)• Service Difficulty Reports (SDR) Several private and industry aviation safety database programs were discussed, but time constraints prevented a thorough enough analysis for the team to arrive at meaningful results or conclusions. For this reason, it was decided to focus on programs with direct federal aviation administration involvement. A fundamental federal aviation administration objective is the use of information and knowledge to improve air safety and prevent accidents. This objective led to the creation of numerous federal aviation administration data programs to collect and analyze aviation safety data. The primary focus of data collection programs (e.g., the various data collections for which NASDAC provides a user interface) is on data format and metadata collection. Data analysis efforts (e.g., SPAS), hampered by a lack of quality data, spend an inordinate amount of resources on data collection and integrity. Consequently, data collection and data analysis program activities overlap, hindering data analysis and the creation of meaningful products to enhance aviation safety. A data management objective of “improving air safety” is probably too broad and might be better served if it focused on the “creation of products and processes to effectively identify accident precursors and implement intervention techniques.” Data identity and retrieval information (metadata) is crucial, and the existing data provide limited ability to uniquely identify events. For example, data regarding a rejected takeoff (RTO) by an Airbus A340 may be submitted as a rejected takeoff, aborted takeoff, or RTO. The aircraft type may be listed as an A340, Airbus 340, or Airbus A340. On a wide-body aircraft with a flight crew of ten, if every crew member submits an Aviation Safety Action Program or Aviation Safety Report System report with a slightly different phraseology, this single event will be registered in the databases as ten different events. This inability to standardize data collection formats reduces confidence in the data itself and is an impediment to using the data for analysis, conclusions, and identifying accident precursors using data mining techniques. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO) is mandated to accomplish federal aviation administration data management objectives as prescribed in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [2]: The Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer (AIO-1) is designated as the focal point and has overall responsibility for the federal aviation administration Data Management Program. However, there is limited coordination between AIO and the other federal aviation administration offices that maintain aviation safety databases and analytical tools such as NASDAC, Aviation Safety Action Program, Flight Operational Quality Assurance, and SPAS. The need for effective oversight is outlined in the federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy [3]: As with many large public and private organizations, the FAA’s information systems have evolved over the past 20 to 30 years to meet specific requirements. This has led to a proliferation of data, much of which is redundant or obsolete. As a result, federal aviation administration data is difficult to share, costly to assemble, and hard to assess in terms of integrity and accuracy. At the same time, there is an increasing need to share information externally with domestic air carriers, international civil aviation administrations, Congress, and the flying public. There is general agreement that the federal aviation administration should implement a corporate data management program, but few public or private organizations have successfully done so. Most efforts fail because they are too broad in scope, lack commitment, and grossly underestimate resource requirements. The federal aviation administration data management program, therefore, needs to be narrowly focused on the areas with the greatest potential benefits for the agency. The process should be evolutionary, with emphasis on collaboration where it makes sense, standardization of core data elements, better communication along the information chain, and discrete projects that address the areas of greatest need. The lines-of-business (LOBs) will work with the Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer (AIO) to implement this Data Management Strategy and subsequent program. The lack of federal aviation administration data management coordination can be traced in part to the current state of organizational autonomous authority that does not foster a spirit of inter-departmental coordination. This lack of coordination results in a proliferation of fragmented individual data management programs and unnecessary duplication of effort.Enhancing federal aviation administration oversight and a willingness on the part of the federal aviation administration offices to cooperate with each other would improve the effectiveness of existing data management programs by• streamlining resource utilization•, reducing duplication of effort •, and enabling prompt product(s) development and delivery. Other data collection and analysis programs could provide additional safety data and product synergies with federal aviation administration programs:• National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)• Department of Defense (DoD)• International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)• Flight Safety Foundation (FSF)• American Aviation Safety Information System (AASIS)• British Airways Safety Information System (BASIS)• AirClaims • International Air Transport Association (IATA)• Boeing• Airbus• Component manufacturers Overlapping objectives, activities, and limited resources indicate federal aviation administration data programs are not coordinated (stovepiped). There is minimal intra-FAA data management program coordination, and no clearly defined office is responsible for coordinating these activities. Significant effort is underway to improve the quality of aviation safety data identification and collection. Implementing an oversight function in accordance with federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, Data Management [2[; federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy [3]; and federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [4] would permit the federal aviation administration to streamline resources and programs and expand program capabilities. Finding 6 Basic data definition and reporting requirements are poorly defined relative to the needs of analysts and other users. Data Definition and Reporting Requirements Quality data are fundamental for meaningful and effective analyses. Data directly influence the effectiveness of the decisions and actions taken to improve safety, not just by the federal aviation administration but also by regulators, operators, manufacturers, and supporting industries. Poor quality data also hamper the ability to identify accident precursors. Reporting requirements, e.g., 14 code of federal regulations §21.3 and 14 code of federal regulations §121.703 – 705, alone are insufficient because: • Mandatory data reporting requirements do not always ensure that adequate or relevant data are collected to reliably identify accident precursor events. Frequently, data are required to be reported only after an accident occurs, which may help explain the preceding accident but fails to collect the data necessary to identify precursors and help prevent another, possibly different, type of accident. • Data collection requirements do not adequately consider the resource constraints within the federal aviation administration and the user community and industry. Data are frequently collected and submitted without a clear understanding of the purpose of the submission and with no relevant feedback to the organization making the submission. • Data are being defined and collected without a clear understanding of who the customers are, what analysis tools are available to mine the data, and what end product(s) the data must serve. Voluntarily reported data (e.g., Aviation Safety Action Program, Flight Operational Quality Assurance), while excellent resources are not always sufficient, reliable, or available to those who need them. Data suppliers may elect not to contribute data out of fear of negative publicity, legal liability, or regulatory enforcement action. It is imperative that data suppliers be provided robust legal and enforcement immunities and incentives to provide data voluntarily (see Finding 9). A lot of data is collected on component reliability and failure patterns and rates, but there is also a need to capture lessons learned from the human/machine interface. Flight crews and maintenance personnel interface increasingly with the aircraft through computer systems. Knowledge of, and proficiency with, these computer systems is an increasingly more important part of flight crew and maintenance training and line operations. Human factors issues regarding these interfaces should be captured for analysis and fed back to the aircraft and systems manufacturers. In many flight crew operating manuals, the flight management computer section is thicker than those relating to engine, electrical, hydraulic, and flight controls—a significant change from aircraft manufactured 20 years ago. radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 [5] addressed this issue: User feedback, especially regarding errors encountered in the use of new equipment or procedures, is heavily stifled because of fear of retribution or other adverse consequences. Without early and comprehensive user feedback, safety suffers, at least in the inability to identify and correct problems detected through minor incidents, which could have more serious safety-related consequences. Data may also be skewed based on a unique operating environment. For example, operations in harsh deserts or arctic climates might skew the data and any analyses or conclusions. A cross-sampling of data from multiple operators is needed to ensure the fidelity of the analyses and any conclusions or recommended actions. Data are being collected in non-standardized formats and stored in multiple, often incompatible, databases. Analysis tools are usually incompatible and narrowly focused on a specific objective or product. As a result, resources are expended on multiple projects and produce separate yet essentially equivalent products. As a result of multiple unique data collection programs, associated products may not serve the aviation safety needs of the government and industry. This further isolates users into unique programs to meet specific needs and perpetuates the problem of stovepiping and database proliferation. Users supporting too many individual database programs are less inclined or able (because of time constraints) to support more broad-based programs. Data definition and collection, as part of an integrated data management program, are noted in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [6]: The guiding principles below represent the vision for the federal aviation administration data management program:•Data is viewed as a corporate resource used to make informed business decisions.•Data is available in a timely, easily accessible, and understandable format to all users who need it.•Core data is standardized for increased interoperability and increased accuracy.•Maintenance and development costs are reduced by eliminating redundant and obsolete data, and through data reuse.•Data development is coordinated across LOBs using a standardized methodology.•Data is managed throughout its life cycle from creation to disposition.•AIO is the focal point for corporate data management activities. The primary goal of the federal aviation administration data management program is to make reliable information available quickly. Figure 5 shows some of the formal and informal information flows among regulators, carriers, and manufacturers. Finding 7 There is no widely accepted process for analyzing service data or events to identify potential accident precursors. Identification of Accident Precursors Identification of Accident Precursors Existing data analysis programs are seldom effective at identifying precursors with accident potential. Some non-regulatory processes used by OEMs and airlines are somewhat effective and could be standardized throughout the industry. Some accidents have precursor incidents that indicate that the actual failure mode, or a similar event, had been experienced at least once prior to the accident. For example, the engine failure on a National Airlines DC-10 [7] was preceded by two similar events on engine test cells. In another example, a Turkish Airways DC-10 cargo door [8] failed in a similar manner to an American Airlines DC-10 [9]. The reporting processes used by the airlines to alert manufacturers and the federal aviation administration to in-service events can provide a source of information to search for precursor events. The difficulty is that a precursor event is just another report among many until a post-accident data search finds it. Some OEMs and airlines, in conjunction with the FAA, have developed processes to seek out precursor events and to evaluate the probability of an accident occurring. Integrated federal aviation administration and industry safety data management systems should:• Effectively identify accident precursors• Provide regulators, operators, and manufacturers information to improve the design and operational practices of new and in-service airplanes. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO) is mandated to accomplish federal aviation administration data management objectives as prescribed in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [10]as follows: •Emphasizes data management as anessential agency program with data being an enterprise resource.•Establishes a comprehensive, corporate Data Management Program rather than strictly data standardization.•Establishes responsibilities for data management within each line of business (LOB) and staff office (SO).•Establishes the key infrastructure necessary to support the Data Management Program. The federal aviation administration is a data-driven organization. The FAA's Data Management Strategy [11] outlines the agency’s approach to the efficient and effective management of data. This order establishes the concepts of the data management strategy as an ongoing program for the management of federal aviation administration data. This order also supports the information goal of the federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [12], which is to make reliable information available quickly. Both of these strategies identify data management as essential to the long-term performance of the FAA’s mission and functions and the successful implementation of key initiatives to modernize the National Airspace System (NAS) and improve safety, security, and administrative information systems. The effectiveness of existing federal aviation administration data management programs could be enhanced by: • A better understanding of air transport operations by federal aviation administration data management offices that would improve their ability to provide meaningful safety data information and analyses to their customers. These customers can be either internal to the federal aviation administration or outside of the industry. • Educating federal aviation administration and industry users on these organizations’ capabilities, products, or services could lead to federal aviation administration data management programs being better appreciated or understood by potential federal aviation administration and industry customers. Multiple programs proliferate (FAA and industry) that rely solely on the individual user’s data. Stovepiping is also an issue within organizations. For example, maintenance data are often analyzed with maintenance software, and operations data are analyzed using operations software. Hiring sufficient personnel with unique or specific data management knowledge and skills is critical. The skills required to identify precursor data or events are difficult to train and frequently must be augmented by technical support from OEMs, operators, or maintenance personnel. To avoid over-reliance on outside agencies for technical competency, federal aviation administration data management offices must recruit, train, and maintain personnel with requisite technical expertise and skills, as noted in federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [12]: People: Acquire and maintain critical IT knowledge, skills, and abilities. The aviation paradigm and information technology are changing so rapidly that keeping the workforce technologically current is daunting. Today, many federal aviation administration efforts focus on recruiting, retaining, and training its IT staff, but there is no consensus within the agency as to which are the most important IT knowledge, skills, and abilities, and no corporate program to acquire and develop people with those skills. Over the next three years, that consensus will be built, and programs will be put in place to acquire and develop people with critical IT knowledge, skills, and abilities, as well as to maintain those capabilities. While the challenges of creating a data management program to identify accident precursors appear daunting, there are a few existing programs that are effectively doing just that: • The engine OEM/FAA Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies (CAAM), • FAA/Boeing Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) • The airline/FAA Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP)• Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) All of these programs involve specialists reviewing incident reports for potential safety events, e.g., chafed wiring, sticking controls, operational difficulty with avionics, or operating procedures, and recognizing that an accident could have occurred if events had been just a little different. The process then determines the risk involved with not changing the airplane or procedure, and if the risk is too high, the airplane design or procedure is revised. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies (CAAM) The Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodology (CAAM) was developed in the early 1990s by an Aircraft Industries Association/European Aerospace Industry Association (AIA/AECMA) Propulsion Sub-Committee in response to the need for industry and the federal aviation administration Engine and Propeller Directorate to more effectively manage engine, propeller, and auxiliary power unit (APU) unsafe conditions. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies is a data-driven process that sets a limit for accident risk and provides the time allowed to correct an unsafe condition while still remaining within the risk limit. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies has been applied most frequently to engine, propeller, and Auxiliary Power Unit problems, but the concepts have potential application to airframe continued airworthiness as well. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies has identified several incident and accident precursors. • PW4000 high pressure compressor Front Drum Rotor (Airworthiness Directive 2001-20-13) and HPT (Airworthiness Directive 2001-20-02) cracking • AE3007 HPT 1-2 Spacer (Airworthiness Directive 2001-19-03) with higher stresses than predicted• AE2100 HPT wheel (Airworthiness Directive 2001-17-31) cracking• JT8D compressor disks (Airworthiness Directive 2001-15-58) delivered with machining damage • CF34 bearing system (Airworthiness Directive 2001-12-06) report of compartment over-temperature and excessive disk growth Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies is a living process that continues to expand and improve. The process was updated in 1996 and is now in another update phase under the direction of the federal aviation administration Office of International Aviation; Aircraft Industries Association Propulsion Committee. It is the basis of the FAA's draft Advisory Circular AC39-xx, which applies to potentially unsafe conditions in propulsion-related transport airplanes [13]. Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) In 1999, the FAA-Boeing Partnership for Safety Plan working agreement on the Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) was developed based on the principles and practices to be followed in reporting, analyzing, and resolving safety events and issues related to the Boeing transport airplane fleet. Recent problems worked through this process included [14]:• Accelerated electrical connector corrosion, mostly on Boeing 737NG wheel wells, related to the use of potassium phosphate runway de-icing fluid, mostly in Northern Europe • A miscalibrated angle-of-attack (AOA) vane that caused a high-speed RTO. An airline was using a multi-mode shop rigging tool and erroneously set a Boeing 757 vane to Boeing 727 settings. • During a routine inspection of a Boeing 747, the primary nut on the engine strut midspan fuse pin was found backed out to the secondary retention feature. After an extensive investigation, an Airworthiness Directive was issued to address the unsafe condition. Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) The Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) program in use by several US and international airlines captures and analyzes flight data recorder information to assist the federal aviation administration and airlines to identify unsafe trends and improve flight crew training and maintenance programs and to provide feedback to OEMs. Collection of Flight Operational Quality Assurance data enables operators to focus on specific operational problem areas, such as unstabilized final approaches that can result in aircraft departing the runway or a hard landing or tail strike. Aviation Safety Action Partnership (ASAP) In 1992, American Airlines implemented the Aviation Safety Action Partnership (ASAP) program, a voluntary incident reporting system. This program is viewed as a prototype for future operational data-sharing partnerships between the airlines and the FAA. Aviation Safety Action Program is part of a growing effort by the airlines and the federal aviation administration to collect and analyze airline operational data. The correlation of Aviation Safety Action Program trend information with objective data from the Flight Operational Quality Assurance program can provide a valuable means to evaluate historical data and try to prevent accidents before they happen. The NRC Low Report [15] (1980) noted: A properly employed information system is indispensable for providing clues to and early warning of potential accidents. Critical to the effectiveness of such a system are the following elements:1) Information should be gathered and processed quickly, and the system should be capable of highlighting those items having possible consequences for safety.2) Additional information, beyond what is now available, should be obtained, wherever possible. The federal aviation administration needs to devote more attention to the safety information passing between and among the airlines and manufacturers, which is now largely outside its purview.3) The data should be analyzed by well-qualified users.4) The users of the system must be disciplined to determine the cause of every incident, failure, or accident, to require that corrective action be taken, and to provide feedback to all concerned parties. This position is also supported by recommendations made in the 1998 Continuing Airworthiness Risk Evaluation (CARE) Report [16, Chapter 2.3.6]. Implementation of these recommended processes from the Low and Continuing Airworthiess Risk Evaluation reports, as well as those from radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 [17], could consolidate data collection efforts and focus on the needs of data analysts examining data for safety and reliability improvement opportunities. Data management programs must create products and services that effectively identify accident precursors. The focus needs to be on interventions to prevent the next accident by implementing lessons learned from previous accidents and incident investigations. Data collection, data mining, and analysis with automated tools must be developed to alleviate resource constraints and human error. Resources for these efforts are available by integrating existing data management programs. As a result of the unique requirements of regulators and industry, it is probably impossible to create a one-size-fits-all program. In the short term, the federal aviation administration should coordinate resource utilization and review and implement best practices. Expediency is important since natural and man-made hazards continue to threaten the safe and efficient transportation of the traveling public. Aviation Safety Data Management Numerous interviews with federal aviation administration data management personnel were conducted. Because of the CPS one-year charter time constraint, the focus was on federal aviation administration data management programs only rather than on those of the entire industry. Finding 5 illustrates the primary federal aviation administration data management issue: too many independent programs are without effective inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Each program is resource-limited, and when asked if programs were focusing on identifying accident precursor events, the answer was generally no. Findings 6 and 7 address data definition and reporting requirements and the need for effective data management methodologies and tools. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO), or an equivalent organization, should coordinate the various activities of the federal aviation administration data management program. The following publications define the FAA’s data management and information technology (IT) programs: • federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, federal aviation administration Data Management (June 20, 2001)• federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy (September 21, 1999) • federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy, (September 22, 1999) These publications are significant and should be implemented promptly before technical or philosophical obsolescence becomes an issue. The FAA’s efforts run the risk of falling into the trap noted in federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy: There is general agreement that the federal aviation administration should implement a corporate data management program, but few public or private organizations have successfully done so. Most efforts fail because they are too broad in scope, lack commitment, and grossly underestimate resource requirements. Improving Aircraft Safety (The Low Report)[1] identified these same findings over 20 years ago, and they are still relevant today. Finding 5 Multiple FAA-sponsored data collection and analysis programs exist without adequate inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Coordination of Data Management Systems Effective data management requires clearly defined lines of business (LOBs) that provide customers with meaningful and timely products to maintain and improve commercial air safety. The complexity and scope of these efforts require effective program management from the highest levels of the federal aviation administration to the field stations. Anything less than a fully integrated and coordinated management structure runs the risk of inefficient resource use and the possibility that intervention opportunities to prevent accidents will be missed. The following federal aviation administration data collection and analysis programs (see Glossary for additional definitions) were reviewed either in person or by teleconference:• Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP)• Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS)• Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP)• federal aviation administration Chief Information Office (AIO)• Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA)• Global Aviation Information Network (GAIN)• National Aviation Safety Data Analysis Center (NASDAC) • Program Tracking and Reporting System (PTRS)• Safety Performance Analysis System (SPAS)• Service Difficulty Reports (SDR) Several private and industry aviation safety database programs were discussed, but time constraints prevented a thorough enough analysis for the team to arrive at meaningful results or conclusions. For this reason, it was decided to focus on programs with direct federal aviation administration involvement. A fundamental federal aviation administration objective is the use of information and knowledge to improve air safety and prevent accidents. This objective led to the creation of numerous federal aviation administration data programs to collect and analyze aviation safety data. The primary focus of data collection programs (e.g., the various data collections for which NASDAC provides a user interface) is on data format and metadata collection. Data analysis efforts (e.g., SPAS), hampered by a lack of quality data, spend an inordinate amount of resources on data collection and integrity. Consequently, data collection and data analysis program activities overlap, hindering data analysis and the creation of meaningful products to enhance aviation safety. A data management objective of “improving air safety” is probably too broad and might be better served if it focused on the “creation of products and processes to effectively identify accident precursors and implement intervention techniques.” Data identity and retrieval information (metadata) is crucial, and the existing data provide limited ability to uniquely identify events. For example, data regarding a rejected takeoff (RTO) by an Airbus A340 may be submitted as a rejected takeoff, aborted takeoff, or RTO. The aircraft type may be listed as an A340, Airbus 340, or Airbus A340. On a wide-body aircraft with a flight crew of ten, if every crew member submits an Aviation Safety Action Program or Aviation Safety Report System report with a slightly different phraseology, this single event will be registered in the databases as ten different events. This inability to standardize data collection formats reduces confidence in the data itself and is an impediment to using the data for analysis, conclusions, and identifying accident precursors using data mining techniques. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO) is mandated to accomplish federal aviation administration data management objectives as prescribed in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [2]: The Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer (AIO-1) is designated as the focal point and has overall responsibility for the federal aviation administration Data Management Program. However, there is limited coordination between AIO and the other federal aviation administration offices that maintain aviation safety databases and analytical tools such as NASDAC, Aviation Safety Action Program, Flight Operational Quality Assurance, and SPAS. The need for effective oversight is outlined in the federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy [3]: As with many large public and private organizations, the FAA’s information systems have evolved over the past 20 to 30 years to meet specific requirements. This has led to a proliferation of data, much of which is redundant or obsolete. As a result, federal aviation administration data is difficult to share, costly to assemble, and hard to assess in terms of integrity and accuracy. At the same time, there is an increasing need to share information externally with domestic air carriers, international civil aviation administrations, Congress, and the flying public. There is general agreement that the federal aviation administration should implement a corporate data management program, but few public or private organizations have successfully done so. Most efforts fail because they are too broad in scope, lack commitment, and grossly underestimate resource requirements. The federal aviation administration data management program, therefore, needs to be narrowly focused on the areas with the greatest potential benefits for the agency. The process should be evolutionary, with emphasis on collaboration where it makes sense, standardization of core data elements, better communication along the information chain, and discrete projects that address the areas of greatest need. The lines-of-business (LOBs) will work with the Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer (AIO) to implement this Data Management Strategy and subsequent program. The lack of federal aviation administration data management coordination can be traced in part to the current state of organizational autonomous authority that does not foster a spirit of inter-departmental coordination. This lack of coordination results in a proliferation of fragmented individual data management programs and unnecessary duplication of effort.Enhancing federal aviation administration oversight and a willingness on the part of the federal aviation administration offices to cooperate with each other would improve the effectiveness of existing data management programs by• streamlining resource utilization•, reducing duplication of effort •, and enabling prompt product(s) development and delivery. Other data collection and analysis programs could provide additional safety data and product synergies with federal aviation administration programs:• National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)• Department of Defense (DoD)• International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)• Flight Safety Foundation (FSF)• American Aviation Safety Information System (AASIS)• British Airways Safety Information System (BASIS)• AirClaims • International Air Transport Association (IATA)• Boeing• Airbus• Component manufacturers Overlapping objectives, activities, and limited resources indicate federal aviation administration data programs are not coordinated (stovepiped). There is minimal intra-FAA data management program coordination, and no clearly defined office is responsible for coordinating these activities. Significant effort is underway to improve the quality of aviation safety data identification and collection. Implementing an oversight function in accordance with federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, Data Management [2[; federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy [3]; and federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [4] would permit the federal aviation administration to streamline resources and programs and expand program capabilities. Finding 6 Basic data definition and reporting requirements are poorly defined relative to the needs of analysts and other users. Data Definition and Reporting Requirements Quality data are fundamental for meaningful and effective analyses. Data directly influence the effectiveness of the decisions and actions taken to improve safety, not just by the federal aviation administration but also by regulators, operators, manufacturers, and supporting industries. Poor quality data also hamper the ability to identify accident precursors. Reporting requirements, e.g., 14 code of federal regulations §21.3 and 14 code of federal regulations §121.703 – 705, alone are insufficient because: • Mandatory data reporting requirements do not always ensure that adequate or relevant data are collected to reliably identify accident precursor events. Frequently, data are required to be reported only after an accident occurs, which may help explain the preceding accident but fails to collect the data necessary to identify precursors and help prevent another, possibly different, type of accident. • Data collection requirements do not adequately consider the resource constraints within the federal aviation administration and the user community and industry. Data are frequently collected and submitted without a clear understanding of the purpose of the submission and with no relevant feedback to the organization making the submission. • Data are being defined and collected without a clear understanding of who the customers are, what analysis tools are available to mine the data, and what end product(s) the data must serve. Voluntarily reported data (e.g., Aviation Safety Action Program, Flight Operational Quality Assurance), while excellent resources are not always sufficient, reliable, or available to those who need them. Data suppliers may elect not to contribute data out of fear of negative publicity, legal liability, or regulatory enforcement action. It is imperative that data suppliers be provided robust legal and enforcement immunities and incentives to provide data voluntarily (see Finding 9). A lot of data is collected on component reliability and failure patterns and rates, but there is also a need to capture lessons learned from the human/machine interface. Flight crews and maintenance personnel interface increasingly with the aircraft through computer systems. Knowledge of, and proficiency with, these computer systems is an increasingly more important part of flight crew and maintenance training and line operations. Human factors issues regarding these interfaces should be captured for analysis and fed back to the aircraft and systems manufacturers. In many flight crew operating manuals, the flight management computer section is thicker than those relating to engine, electrical, hydraulic, and flight controls—a significant change from aircraft manufactured 20 years ago. radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 [5] addressed this issue: User feedback, especially regarding errors encountered in the use of new equipment or procedures, is heavily stifled because of fear of retribution or other adverse consequences. Without early and comprehensive user feedback, safety suffers, at least in the inability to identify and correct problems detected through minor incidents, which could have more serious safety-related consequences. Data may also be skewed based on a unique operating environment. For example, operations in harsh deserts or arctic climates might skew the data and any analyses or conclusions. A cross-sampling of data from multiple operators is needed to ensure the fidelity of the analyses and any conclusions or recommended actions. Data are being collected in non-standardized formats and stored in multiple, often incompatible, databases. Analysis tools are usually incompatible and narrowly focused on a specific objective or product. As a result, resources are expended on multiple projects and produce separate yet essentially equivalent products. As a result of multiple unique data collection programs, associated products may not serve the aviation safety needs of the government and industry. This further isolates users into unique programs to meet specific needs and perpetuates the problem of stovepiping and database proliferation. Users supporting too many individual database programs are less inclined or able (because of time constraints) to support more broad-based programs. Data definition and collection, as part of an integrated data management program, are noted in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [6]: The guiding principles below represent the vision for the federal aviation administration data management program:•Data is viewed as a corporate resource used to make informed business decisions.•Data is available in a timely, easily accessible, and understandable format to all users who need it.•Core data is standardized for increased interoperability and increased accuracy.•Maintenance and development costs are reduced by eliminating redundant and obsolete data, and through data reuse.•Data development is coordinated across LOBs using a standardized methodology.•Data is managed throughout its life cycle from creation to disposition.•AIO is the focal point for corporate data management activities. The primary goal of the federal aviation administration data management program is to make reliable information available quickly. Figure 5 shows some of the formal and informal information flows among regulators, carriers, and manufacturers. Finding 7 There is no widely accepted process for analyzing service data or events to identify potential accident precursors. Identification of Accident Precursors Identification of Accident Precursors Existing data analysis programs are seldom effective at identifying precursors with accident potential. Some non-regulatory processes used by OEMs and airlines are somewhat effective and could be standardized throughout the industry. Some accidents have precursor incidents that indicate that the actual failure mode, or a similar event, had been experienced at least once prior to the accident. For example, the engine failure on a National Airlines DC-10 [7] was preceded by two similar events on engine test cells. In another example, a Turkish Airways DC-10 cargo door [8] failed in a similar manner to an American Airlines DC-10 [9]. The reporting processes used by the airlines to alert manufacturers and the federal aviation administration to in-service events can provide a source of information to search for precursor events. The difficulty is that a precursor event is just another report among many until a post-accident data search finds it. Some OEMs and airlines, in conjunction with the FAA, have developed processes to seek out precursor events and to evaluate the probability of an accident occurring. Integrated federal aviation administration and industry safety data management systems should:• Effectively identify accident precursors• Provide regulators, operators, and manufacturers information to improve the design and operational practices of new and in-service airplanes. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO) is mandated to accomplish federal aviation administration data management objectives as prescribed in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [10]as follows: •Emphasizes data management as anessential agency program with data being an enterprise resource.•Establishes a comprehensive, corporate Data Management Program rather than strictly data standardization.•Establishes responsibilities for data management within each line of business (LOB) and staff office (SO).•Establishes the key infrastructure necessary to support the Data Management Program. The federal aviation administration is a data-driven organization. The FAA's Data Management Strategy [11] outlines the agency’s approach to the efficient and effective management of data. This order establishes the concepts of the data management strategy as an ongoing program for the management of federal aviation administration data. This order also supports the information goal of the federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [12], which is to make reliable information available quickly. Both of these strategies identify data management as essential to the long-term performance of the FAA’s mission and functions and the successful implementation of key initiatives to modernize the National Airspace System (NAS) and improve safety, security, and administrative information systems. The effectiveness of existing federal aviation administration data management programs could be enhanced by: • A better understanding of air transport operations by federal aviation administration data management offices that would improve their ability to provide meaningful safety data information and analyses to their customers. These customers can be either internal to the federal aviation administration or outside of the industry. • Educating federal aviation administration and industry users on these organizations’ capabilities, products, or services could lead to federal aviation administration data management programs being better appreciated or understood by potential federal aviation administration and industry customers. Multiple programs proliferate (FAA and industry) that rely solely on the individual user’s data. Stovepiping is also an issue within organizations. For example, maintenance data are often analyzed with maintenance software, and operations data are analyzed using operations software. Hiring sufficient personnel with unique or specific data management knowledge and skills is critical. The skills required to identify precursor data or events are difficult to train and frequently must be augmented by technical support from OEMs, operators, or maintenance personnel. To avoid over-reliance on outside agencies for technical competency, federal aviation administration data management offices must recruit, train, and maintain personnel with requisite technical expertise and skills, as noted in federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [12]: People: Acquire and maintain critical IT knowledge, skills, and abilities. The aviation paradigm and information technology are changing so rapidly that keeping the workforce technologically current is daunting. Today, many federal aviation administration efforts focus on recruiting, retaining, and training its IT staff, but there is no consensus within the agency as to which are the most important IT knowledge, skills, and abilities, and no corporate program to acquire and develop people with those skills. Over the next three years, that consensus will be built, and programs will be put in place to acquire and develop people with critical IT knowledge, skills, and abilities, as well as to maintain those capabilities. While the challenges of creating a data management program to identify accident precursors appear daunting, there are a few existing programs that are effectively doing just that: • The engine OEM/FAA Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies (CAAM), • FAA/Boeing Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) • The airline/FAA Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP)• Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) All of these programs involve specialists reviewing incident reports for potential safety events, e.g., chafed wiring, sticking controls, operational difficulty with avionics, or operating procedures, and recognizing that an accident could have occurred if events had been just a little different. The process then determines the risk involved with not changing the airplane or procedure, and if the risk is too high, the airplane design or procedure is revised. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies (CAAM) The Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodology (CAAM) was developed in the early 1990s by an Aircraft Industries Association/European Aerospace Industry Association (AIA/AECMA) Propulsion Sub-Committee in response to the need for industry and the federal aviation administration Engine and Propeller Directorate to more effectively manage engine, propeller, and auxiliary power unit (APU) unsafe conditions. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies is a data-driven process that sets a limit for accident risk and provides the time allowed to correct an unsafe condition while still remaining within the risk limit. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies has been applied most frequently to engine, propeller, and Auxiliary Power Unit problems, but the concepts have potential application to airframe continued airworthiness as well. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies has identified several incident and accident precursors. • PW4000 high pressure compressor Front Drum Rotor (Airworthiness Directive 2001-20-13) and HPT (Airworthiness Directive 2001-20-02) cracking • AE3007 HPT 1-2 Spacer (Airworthiness Directive 2001-19-03) with higher stresses than predicted• AE2100 HPT wheel (Airworthiness Directive 2001-17-31) cracking• JT8D compressor disks (Airworthiness Directive 2001-15-58) delivered with machining damage • CF34 bearing system (Airworthiness Directive 2001-12-06) report of compartment over-temperature and excessive disk growth Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies is a living process that continues to expand and improve. The process was updated in 1996 and is now in another update phase under the direction of the federal aviation administration Office of International Aviation; Aircraft Industries Association Propulsion Committee. It is the basis of the FAA's draft Advisory Circular AC39-xx, which applies to potentially unsafe conditions in propulsion-related transport airplanes [13]. Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) In 1999, the FAA-Boeing Partnership for Safety Plan working agreement on the Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) was developed based on the principles and practices to be followed in reporting, analyzing, and resolving safety events and issues related to the Boeing transport airplane fleet. Recent problems worked through this process included [14]:• Accelerated electrical connector corrosion, mostly on Boeing 737NG wheel wells, related to the use of potassium phosphate runway de-icing fluid, mostly in Northern Europe • A miscalibrated angle-of-attack (AOA) vane that caused a high-speed RTO. An airline was using a multi-mode shop rigging tool and erroneously set a Boeing 757 vane to Boeing 727 settings. • During a routine inspection of a Boeing 747, the primary nut on the engine strut midspan fuse pin was found backed out to the secondary retention feature. After an extensive investigation, an Airworthiness Directive was issued to address the unsafe condition. Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) The Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) program in use by several US and international airlines captures and analyzes flight data recorder information to assist the federal aviation administration and airlines to identify unsafe trends and improve flight crew training and maintenance programs and to provide feedback to OEMs. Collection of Flight Operational Quality Assurance data enables operators to focus on specific operational problem areas, such as unstabilized final approaches that can result in aircraft departing the runway or a hard landing or tail strike. Aviation Safety Action Partnership (ASAP) In 1992, American Airlines implemented the Aviation Safety Action Partnership (ASAP) program, a voluntary incident reporting system. This program is viewed as a prototype for future operational data-sharing partnerships between the airlines and the FAA. Aviation Safety Action Program is part of a growing effort by the airlines and the federal aviation administration to collect and analyze airline operational data. The correlation of Aviation Safety Action Program trend information with objective data from the Flight Operational Quality Assurance program can provide a valuable means to evaluate historical data and try to prevent accidents before they happen. The NRC Low Report [15] (1980) noted: A properly employed information system is indispensable for providing clues to and early warning of potential accidents. Critical to the effectiveness of such a system are the following elements:1) Information should be gathered and processed quickly, and the system should be capable of highlighting those items having possible consequences for safety.2) Additional information, beyond what is now available, should be obtained, wherever possible. The federal aviation administration needs to devote more attention to the safety information passing between and among the airlines and manufacturers, which is now largely outside its purview.3) The data should be analyzed by well-qualified users.4) The users of the system must be disciplined to determine the cause of every incident, failure, or accident, to require that corrective action be taken, and to provide feedback to all concerned parties. This position is also supported by recommendations made in the 1998 Continuing Airworthiness Risk Evaluation (CARE) Report [16, Chapter 2.3.6]. Implementation of these recommended processes from the Low and Continuing Airworthiess Risk Evaluation reports, as well as those from radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 [17], could consolidate data collection efforts and focus on the needs of data analysts examining data for safety and reliability improvement opportunities. Data management programs must create products and services that effectively identify accident precursors. The focus needs to be on interventions to prevent the next accident by implementing lessons learned from previous accidents and incident investigations. Data collection, data mining, and analysis with automated tools must be developed to alleviate resource constraints and human error. Resources for these efforts are available by integrating existing data management programs. As a result of the unique requirements of regulators and industry, it is probably impossible to create a one-size-fits-all program. In the short term, the federal aviation administration should coordinate resource utilization and review and implement best practices. Expediency is important since natural and man-made hazards continue to threaten the safe and efficient transportation of the traveling public. Major Repairs and Modifications Once the manufacturer releases an aircraft to an operator, the operator is responsible for maintaining its continued airworthiness. Maintaining continued airworthiness involves routine maintenance, as well as repairs and alterations to the aircraft. For all of these activities, an approved configuration must be maintained. Maintenance, repair, and alteration work is accomplished using either FAA-approved or accepted data, including operator and manufacturer (user) documents.14 code of federal regulations §43.13 states: Each person performing maintenance, alterations, or preventative maintenance on an aircraft, engine, propeller, or appliance shall use the methods, techniques, and practices prescribed in the current manufacturer’s maintenance manual or instructions for continued airworthiness prepared by its manufacturer or other methods, techniques, and practices acceptable to the Administrator. These findings were based on reviews of relevant requirements and advisory material, case studies, historical reports, presentations by and discussions with operators, personnel from large and small maintenance, repair, and alteration companies, Principal Maintenance Inspectors, and team members. Improvements in the areas of repair and alteration classification, quality of the implementation of repairs and alterations, and the process of providing accurate and timely information in user manuals are needed in order to ensure the continued airworthiness of the aircraft. Finding 12 There is no standard process used across the commercial aviation industry or regulatory authority to determine and classify repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft as Major [1] as prescribed by applicable FARs [2]. The result of misclassifying a repair or alteration is the lack of adequate review, validation, and reporting of the sufficiency of repairs or alterations developed for commercial aircraft. Consistency is needed in the major or minor repair decision processes. A major repair or alteration should use a controlled process requiring record keeping, reporting requirements, and FAA-approved data [3]. The lack of a consistent process can lead operators and repair stations to avoid the use of the Major category for repairs and alterations. Repairs and alterations that are classified as Minor generally result in less paperwork and reduced inspection requirements for the maintenance activity. The reason for this inconsistency is that FARs and guidance material lack clear and unambiguous decision logic that would allow consistent and proper classification of a repair or alteration as Major. Some operators have developed a detailed decision logic process that more adequately addresses the Major/ Minor classification requirement than those of other operators. Repair stations may develop their own major or minor decision process or default to the customer’s decision process. Interviews with repair stations [4], federal aviation administration [5,6], and air carrier personnel [7] revealed that there is continuing concern that the lack of a standardized process for the appropriate classification of repairs and alterations can have an adverse impact on the continued airworthiness of aircraft. Rather than a uniform industry-wide process, each airline operator or FAA-certificated repair station has the responsibility for the determination and classification of repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft in accordance with applicable FARs such as 14 code of federal regulations Part 43, Appendix A and B. An Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) working group, the Clarification of Major/Minor Repairs or Alterations Working Group, was established in 1994 to examine this issue [8]. The existence of this activity indicates that the federal aviation administration and industry recognize this subject as a significant concern for aviation safety. The result of a standardized classification process for major repairs and alterations to aircraft will enhance aircraft safety by assuring that all 14 code of federal regulations Part 121 operators and 14 code of federal regulations Part 145 repair stations use an appropriate level of decision logic. This will maintain the focus on safety and continued airworthiness when addressing repairs or alterations to commercial transport aircraft. Finding 13 Inconsistencies exist between the safety assessments conducted for the initial Type Certificate (TC) of an airplane and some of those conducted for subsequent alterations to the airplane or systems. Improved federal aviation administration and industry oversight of repair and alteration activity is needed to ensure that safety has not been compromised by subsequent repairs and alterations. Quality of Alterations and Repair Processes Processes for the design and accomplishment of repairs and alterations, including oversight, have not always ensured the continued airworthiness of the airplane. Safety assessments prepared for certification of alterations to the airplane or systems may not meet the same standards as those for the original type certificate, although the FARs require they do so. Cases exist where the modification station or company did not have the appropriate expertise or access to original certification data to conduct adequate safety analyses. Two case studies revealed a lack of design expertise or the use of pertinent original equipment manufacturer design data, which may have contributed to an accident or significant non-airworthiness condition. In the Boeing 727 passenger-to-freighter conversion, the federal aviation administration found no, or limited, structural analysis for the pressure deck, wing-box beams, and the lateral floor restraint in the Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) file [9]. In a later analysis, the federal aviation administration determined that the margins of safety calculated for the floor beams in the supplemental type certificate did not comply with Civil Air Regulations 4.b requirements [10]. After the Swissair Flight 111 accident, the federal aviation administration conducted a Special Certification Review (SCR) of the In-flight Entertainment System (IFE) [11]. The review was to evaluate the design, installation, and certification process of the approved IFE system. The SCR team determined that the IFE system electrical power switching was not compatible with the original equipment manufacturer design concept of the MD-11. The Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) is leading the investigation into this accident and has not completed its work or established a probable cause. The consistency of federal aviation administration and industry oversight varies greatly, which has resulted in some repairs and alterations being non-compliant with the FARs. Published historical reports [12,13,14,15] and CPS team interviews with commercial airline operators [16, 17] and FAA-certificated repair station personnel [18] have confirmed there has been, and can continue to be, an adverse impact on commercial aviation safety when there is insufficient oversight. There is no requirement for a facility approved to perform major repairs and alterations [19] or for an supplemental type certificate applicant to consult with the federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Office and Aircraft Evaluation Group offices involved in the original TC approval, the OEM, or holders of other STCs applicable to that work. Cases exist where failure to do this has had an adverse impact on the continued airworthiness of the aircraft. The supplemental type certificate Process Review Final Report [12] has also cited this concern. The lack of clear requirements for repairs and alterations, combined with inadequate federal aviation administration and Industry oversight, results in the potential for insufficient repairs or alterations of commercial transport aircraft. The subject of this finding is closely linked to Findings 4 and 10 in this report. Observation 1 original equipment manufacturer and Operator maintenance manuals, illustrated parts catalogs (IPC), wiring diagrams, and other documents needed to maintain aircraft in an airworthy configuration after incorporation of service bulletins (SB) and Airworthiness Directives (AD) are not always revised to reflect each aircraft’s approved configuration at the time the modifications are implemented. Airworthiness Directive/ Service Bulletin Information Flow into Field Reference Materials Maintenance manuals, illustrated parts catalogs (IPCs), wiring diagrams, and other FAA-accepted or approved manuals are required for continued airworthiness. Incorrect data as a result of delayed revisions to user manuals can result in the release of aircraft into service in a non-airworthy configuration. Airworthiness directives [20] and service bulletins are not stand-alone documents. These documents usually refer to other documents to provide detailed instructions for accomplishment. Most ADs rely on Service Bulletins, which in turn may reference maintenance manuals, wiring diagrams, or illustrated parts catalog (IPC) information to accomplish the work. This information, which may be referenced in the Airworthiness Directive or SB, may not have been revised to the standard assumed in the Airworthiness Directive or SB. When SBs are incorporated into an aircraft, the instructions in the SB should be considered for information necessary for the continued airworthiness of the aircraft. During CPS team interviews, it was observed that there is a risk that information needed for this continued airworthiness is not always incorporated into the user documents within a reasonable time. During an interview [21], a situation was cited where a mechanic had used an illustrated parts catalog that had not been revised to reflect the requirements of an Airworthiness Directive, which resulted in the use of a component not authorized by the Airworthiness Directive. The mechanic performing this work used the latest published manual information available. The information did not reflect the Airworthiness Directive requirements, and there was nothing to alert the mechanic to the fact that this action dealt with an Airworthiness Directive-modified configuration. This missing information resulted in an installation that was not in compliance with an Airworthiness Directive; therefore, the airplane could be considered non-airworthy. A concern also exists with supplemental type certificate configuration management. An supplemental type certificate approved for incorporation on a fleet type may not consider the wide range of actual aircraft configuration differences within that fleet. The information for continuing airworthiness should be provided for incorporation into the user-accepted or approved manuals to ensure supplemental type certificate and Airworthiness Directive configurations are not altered during routine maintenance. A process is needed to adequately assure that proper repairs and modifications are implemented and that mandated configurations are not altered. All manuals and documents that are affected by ADs, AMOCs (Alternative Methods of Compliance), STCs, or other authorized documents must be revised to reflect the mandated aircraft design configuration in order to ensure continued airworthiness. This problem has been recognized as critical in the development and acceptance of Extended Range Operations with Two-Engine Aircraft (ETOPS) operations. As a result, for extended operations aircraft, the Configuration, Maintenance, Procedures (CMP) document is a controlling document that is FAA-approved. The procedure used for extended operations operations and maintenance is recognized as an improvement in the ability of an operator to maintain an approved configuration on the aircraft. Configuration control problems associated with the use of equivalent or substituted parts to Airworthiness Directive or Alternative Methos of Compliance-mandated configurations can exist. There are instances of inadvertent parts substitutions within the manufacturer’s or operator’s material management systems that may result in unapproved configurations being implemented into the aircraft. An improved process is needed for a mandating document to specify areas where manufacturer and operator flexibility is allowed and areas where no flexibility is allowed. The consequence of a lag in introducing continuing airworthiness information into user manuals is the risk of an aircraft being released into service in a non-airworthy configuration or an Airworthiness Directive or STC-required configuration being altered during future maintenance activity. Safety Oversight Processes federal aviation administration and Industry oversight of the design, manufacture, and operation of commercial aircraft involves a large number of tasks. These oversight tasks are often the basis for the discovery of information used to establish safe practices and processes. Oversight also serves as a means to assess the adequacy of existing standards and requirements. The FAA’s Aircraft Certification Service provides oversight of the continued airworthiness of in-service aircraft. These oversight responsibilities include engine and aircraft certification, the development and management of the Designated Engineering Representative (DER) system, rule-making, the validation of foreign engine and aircraft certifications, and, when necessary, the development and issuance of airworthiness directives. FAA’s Flight Standards Service oversight responsibilities include the certification of airlines, airmen, mechanics, and repair stations. They also provide continuing oversight of airline operations, training, and maintenance activities. Industry oversight includes programs used by manufacturers, airlines, and repair stations to review and assess existing processes. Regulatory requirements drive some of the industry oversight processes. However, there are examples of organizations in the industry that have quality assurance programs that exceed those required by the regulations. Strong and effective industry and federal aviation administration oversight processes can be used to identify potential safety problems and accident precursors. The present exceptional commercial aviation safety record can be further enhanced by making improvements in these areas. The designated engineering representative system, detection of single-point human failures, and the industry’s internal oversight processes are the subject of findings or observations in this chapter. Preparation of these findings was based on reviews of relevant requirements and advisory material, case studies, historical reports, presentations by and discussions with operators, the contributions of personnel from large and small maintenance, repair, and alteration companies, federal aviation administration Principal Maintenance and Operations Inspectors, and CPS team members. Finding 14 Consultant Designated Engineering Representatives (DERs) have approved designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. People and Process for Oversight of DERs The designated engineering representative system generally works well. This system has been enhanced by the addition of new processes for the selection and annual review of DERs. However, some consultant designated engineering representative project approvals, which do not require federal aviation administration review, combined with the lack of designated engineering representative and federal aviation administration technical expertise in certain specialized fields, have resulted in designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. Contributing to this is the reluctance of some federal aviation administration designated engineering representative advisors to recommend disciplinary action when DERs are found to be working below acceptable standards. The release of the FAA’s Designee Management Handbook, Order 8100.8A in January 2001, provides guidance for the appointment, annual review, and renewal of DERs [1]. The new guidance is a considerable improvement over past practices. It provides a standard structure for appointing and overseeing designated engineering representative activity, including detailed instructions for the termination of DERs. Two categories of DERs exist: company DERs working for airline, manufacturing, and design organizations and consultant DERs working independently. While problems do occur with company DERs, they are usually discovered because of the larger engineering pool in place and by subsequent peer review. Additionally, the field service experience is reviewed by these DERs, so they are familiar with problems associated with the design. Consultants and company DERs who work for smaller manufacturers that do not have large engineering staffs do not have these peer review or field experience processes. Some consultant DERs have approved designs and data for modifications and alterations that are non-compliant with the regulations. For example, a DER-approved passenger-to-freighter conversion was found to be non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations after the aircraft had returned to service [2]. In this instance, the independent designated engineering representative consulted with an federal aviation administration advisor about the STC. However, based on presentations and interviews with experienced federal aviation administration engineers involved in the investigation of this conversion, neither the designated engineering representative nor the advisor had the technical knowledge to make a proper compliance finding. DERs who have been granted approval authority need not submit their designs to an Aircraft Certification Office for review. In the case of the Swissair MD-11 accident, it was a preliminary finding of an federal aviation administration Special Certification Review (SCR) team [3] that an independent designated engineering representative approved a passenger entertainment system that violated the design criteria used by the manufacturer [4]. In this case, the IFE power source was from a bus other than the one that the flight crew would expect, thereby possibly contributing to confusion when trying to isolate a smoke or fumes source using the emergency checklist. It should be noted that the TSB is leading the investigation for this accident and has not completed its work or established a probable cause. In the case of a Boeing 737-900 after-market antenna installation, errors were discovered in the analysis assumptions when a review was conducted by aircraft certification engineers [5]. These errors resulted in a DER-approved design that did not meet damage tolerance requirements. The perception of some designated engineering representative advisors is that disciplining DERs is difficult because of fear of litigation. This misperception has resulted in little if any, disciplinary action being taken when it may be warranted. A senior federal aviation administration attorney interviewed by the CPS team stated that disciplinary action could readily be taken when appropriate. federal aviation administration designated engineering representative advisor competence is affected by a number of factors. These include experience, education, workload, and the requirement to supervise and review work outside their areas of expertise. In some cases, this may require experience in and detailed knowledge of a subject to do an adequate review, which the designated engineering representative advisor may not possess. In the case of the passenger-to-freighter conversion cited, the designated engineering representative advisor did not properly assess the adequacy of the design data when consulted by the DER. As a result, the federal aviation administration was not aware that an unsafe condition existed [6]. The commercial aerospace industry could not function effectively or efficiently without DERs. Critical to this system is the assurance, through the FAA’s oversight process, that DER-approved designs will maintain airworthiness compliance. The experience levels of federal aviation administration Aviation Safety Engineers (ASEs) are an important factor in determining the effectiveness of this oversight function. The adequacy of federal aviation administration technical competency has been the subject of two previous studies: the National Research Council (NRC) study of 1980 [7] and, more recently, a General Accounting Office (GAO) report in 1993 [8]. A central theme in the NRC study was concern for the technical capabilities of the federal aviation administration specialists overseeing the safety of the commercial fleet. Several recommendations concerned this central issue and concluded that the federal aviation administration “. . . must improve the expertise and quality of the technical staff. . . .”The 1993 General Accounting Office report commented on the high turnover rate and low experience level of federal aviation administration ASEs in the two federal aviation administration ACOs responsible for the majority of commercial transport airplane oversight (Long Beach and Seattle). The turnover rate in ASEs between 1982 and 1993 was 107%, and in 1993, more than 50% had less than five years of federal aviation administration experience. To update this information, the turnover rates and experience levels for the Seattle Aircraft Certification Office and the New England Engine Certification Office were surveyed during the CPS review. Data gathered for the period from 1993 through 2001 showed that the combined turnover rate remains high at 115%, and, presently, over 50% of the ASEs still have less than five years of federal aviation administration experience. Turnover rates and experience levels are not the only indicators of an organization’s technical competence. However, this particular engineering subject area requires years of interdisciplinary exposure to understand the increasingly complex interrelated systems and human factors interfaces of modern aircraft and to learn from past mistakes that led to accidents. The consistently high turnover rate and associated low experience levels are indicators of the limited time available for ASEs to acquire the necessary experience and to understand and apply accident precursor information. Enhancing the expertise of the federal aviation administration ASEs acting as designated engineering representative advisors and establishing criteria for accomplishing adequate review of designated engineering representative approvals has the potential to make significant improvements in the FAA’s oversight of all aspects of commercial transport aircraft design, operations, and maintenance. Finding 15 Processes to detect and correct errors made by individuals in the design, certification, installation, repair, alteration, and operation of transport airplanes are inconsistent, allowing unacceptable errors in critical airworthiness areas. Detection of Single Point Human Error For some certification activities, there are well-ordered and effective processes; for others, no formal process exists, and existing processes may be ineffective. When effective processes do not exist, individuals working independently have made errors in critical airworthiness areas; some of these errors have resulted in accidents. The federal aviation administration has based safety requirements for transport airplanes on fail-safe, redundant, and damage-tolerant design concepts. An important aspect of the fail-safe concept is to eliminate, as far as possible, the dependence on any single system or structural element, the failure of which would cause a hazardous or catastrophic condition (14 code of federal regulations §25.1309 and 14 code of federal regulations §25.571 and Section 5 of Advisory Circular 25.1309-1A.). The fail-safe concept is well established and is intended to protect the airplane from single failure; it extends to provide protection from human errors in some areas of airplane design and operation. For example, one reason transport airplanes require two pilots is to allow continued safe operation if one pilot is incapacitated. Criteria for the development of the software used in the most critical aircraft systems (RTCA/DO-178B) recommend that software verification be accomplished by someone other than the software designer. 14 code of federal regulations §121.369(b)(2)) requires an independent review or verification of maintenance and alterations by a second qualified person to ensure the work has been correctly accomplished in areas where a “. . . failure, malfunction, or defect [that could] endanger the safe operation of the aircraft,” (hereafter referred to as critical airworthiness areas in this finding). However, the requirement that these critical airworthiness areas are fail-safe from a human error perspective is not well defined; it is generally not required in the design area and may not be consistently applied in the maintenance and alteration areas. In commercial aircraft and engine design, where adequate engineering staff exists, redundancy in the oversight of the design generally happens as a result of company policy or organization. However, this redundancy is not required and is not always found when design changes, maintenance, repairs, or alterations involving critical airworthiness areas are accomplished. An example of a situation where a lack of redundancy adversely affected safety was the Japan Airlines Boeing 747 accident involving improper repair of the aft pressure bulkhead [9]. The engineering drawings for the repair were properly done, and the parts were properly manufactured. When difficulty was experienced in installing a part, that part was altered in a manner that did not maintain the integrity of the design. There was no requirement to inspect the work as it was being accomplished or after the repair was complete. A post-work inspection could not have detected that a part was altered. The result was a repair that did not maintain the airworthiness of the aircraft, and an accident resulted. Two Boeing 747 aircraft accidents were caused when engines were mounted to their pylons without fuse-pin retaining devices [10,11,12]. The pins worked loose during flight, causing separation of the engine from the airplane in such a manner as to cause an accident. The British Civil Aviation Authority method of delegating design approval under Joint Aviation Authority Regulation (JAR) 21 has the effect of reducing the chances of single-point human error by delegating authority to organizations instead of to individuals. The expected result is that having a group responsible for design and certification will be more likely to provide adequate redundancy, reducing the instances of failures as a result of single-point human errors. Establishing such redundant verification requirements or practices for all work in critical airworthiness areas would improve the overall safety of commercial air carrier operations. It is very important that such requirements specify that inspections or verifications be accomplished at a time and in a manner when errors can still be detected and corrected. If critical inspection sequences are not specified, improper maintenance work may not be detected. 14 code of federal regulations §43.13(b) requires all work be performed to ensure an airplane is returned, after repair, maintenance, or modification, to its original or properly altered configuration. The rule does not specify how this quality of work is to be met or assured. 14 code of federal regulations §121.371(c) specifies no person may perform a required inspection if they performed the item of work required to be inspected. Yet, although post-work verification inspection requirements are addressed in a general manner, no specific guidance or definition of the type of work requiring inspection is available. The only requirement is that each airline provide, upon request, a list of the items that have been designated as needing such inspection. The original equipment manufacturer does not participate in developing this list. For DER-approved type design data, the same individual who designed the change can approve the change. These DER-approved data are submitted to the Aircraft Certification Office, but there is no requirement that they be reviewed by Aircraft Certification Office engineers. designated engineering representative approval of data used for field approvals (FAA Form 337, Major Alteration, and Major Repairs) or major repairs are not required to be submitted to the Aircraft Certification Office for review. In this case, the designated engineering representative creating the design data can also approve the design data. The federal aviation administration and industry have long accepted that single-point failures in the design of transport airplanes should be avoided in critical airworthiness areas. The human element (DERs, engineers, maintenance personnel, etc.) also affects critical airworthiness areas. By applying the same single-point failure philosophy to human error as is applied to aircraft design, the occurrence of accidents caused by the mistakes of a single individual can be reduced. There are linkages between this finding and Findings 3, 4, and 14. Observation 2 Some air carriers do more extensive oversight than others of their in-house and outsourced flight operations and maintenance activities, with major safety and economic benefits. Oversight Processes and Resources: Industry Briefings provided by large 14 code of federal regulations Part 121 certificated air carrier personnel indicated that when voluntary quality assurance and technical analysis processes are used, significant safety and economic benefits could be realized [13,14]. The effectiveness of these processes was substantiated in interviews with federal aviation administration principal inspectors with maintenance and operations oversight responsibilities [15]. 14 code of federal regulations §121.373, Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS) mandates one of these quality assurance processes. This regulation requires each certificate holder to establish and maintain a program to monitor the performance and effectiveness of its inspection and maintenance activities and to correct any deficiencies in those activities. The CASS process encompasses organizational, procedural, performance, and record-keeping requirements for the maintenance and alteration of air carrier aircraft. Airlines that are the most rigorous in developing and vigorous in applying quality assurance programs get results and, therefore, are the most effective. The Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA) and the Aviation Safety Analysis Program (ASAP) are examples of air carrier voluntary quality assurance processes that were briefed to the CPS team. Again, operators with these programs and federal aviation administration officials responsible for their oversight reported enhanced safety based on the use of information obtained from these programs. The federal aviation administration should encourage all segments of the air carrier industry to enhance their internal analysis processes. It has been suggested that federal aviation administration incentives could be considered to influence others in the aviation community to enhance internal and external quality assurance and technical analysis activities. Conclusions The Certification Process Study evaluated processes associated with the certification, operations, and maintenance of commercial transport airplanes. Particular attention was given to the processes associated with the interfaces between the certification, operations, and maintenance functions, as depicted by the arrows in Figure 6. The study identified fifteen findings and two observations in the following categories: • Safety Assurance Processes•Aviation Safety Data Management • Maintenance/Operations/Certification Interfaces •Major Repairs and Modifications• Safety Oversight Processes The team identified four areas of commonality in the findings and observations (this list is not all-inclusive): Information Flow Critical information may not be available to those who could act upon it. Organizational barriers to communication, failure to recognize the need to communicate, information overload, and language differences may all contribute to information flow breakdowns. Human Factors Failure to account for the human element is a common thread in accidents. Faulty assumptions, incomplete understanding of tasks, and poor feedback of actual human responses may all contribute to mistakes or failures in the human/machine interface. Lessons Learned Significant safety issues learned through accidents are sometimes lost with time and must be re-learned at a very high price. The absence of a comprehensive lessons-learned database, general or non-existent requirements, constraints on information sharing, and loss of corporate knowledge may all contribute to problems being repeated. Accident Precursors Awareness that certain service incidents are effective indicators of the need for intervention measures requires airplane-level safety awareness acquired through both training and experience. Risk management tools and understanding of lessons learned are vital in developing the skills necessary to consistently recognize accident precursor events and initiate corrective actions. Figure 7 indicates how various other perspectives may be useful in identifying the commonalities among the findings and observations. It must be stressed that the findings and observations in this study are clearly interrelated and should not be addressed in isolation. Safety Awareness at the Airplane Level Many of the accidents reviewed during this study followed one or more previous incidents that were not acted upon because those involved in industry and government were unaware of the significance of what they had observed. Often, the reason for this lack of awareness was a failure to view the significance of the event at the airplane level rather than at the system or subsystem level. This airplane-level perspective allows the interface areas to be most apparent, such as human factors considerations of a maintenance task and specific flight crew procedures necessary for system failure intervention. This is also the attribute of a safety specialist that is most difficult to attain, as it depends to a very large extent on the experience of the individual combined with technical capability. Safety awareness at the airplane level is needed for all key safety specialists regardless of their organization and is achieved by both proper training and adequate experience, as illustrated in Figure 8. Safety initiatives could be better coordinated and more effective if the operator, manufacturer, and federal aviation administration could achieve and maintain this level of safety awareness. Cultural Change Traditional relationships among the regulators and industry have inherent constraints that have, in some cases, limited the ability to effectively identify and act on accident precursors. Further safety improvements will require significant intra- and inter-organizational cultural changes to facilitate a more open exchange of information. Regulatory solutions alone cannot achieve the desired results. Solutions are Interrelated Among Manufacturers, Operators, and FAA. Improvements to the safety processes identified in this study will require the manufacturer, operator, and federal aviation administration to work together with coordinated initiatives (see Figure 9). It will be necessary for each organization to enlist the support of a workforce with the necessary safety knowledge and experience, including expanding knowledge in the major interface areas such as those identified in this study. From the information gathered during this study, it is clear that process improvements could be applied in certain key areas, particularly those interfaces with safety implications. Process improvements alone will not improve safety unless regulators and industry work together towards this goal. It will require personnel with special skills, knowledge, and experience to recognize lessons learned and accident precursors and to properly apply risk management tools and techniques. Conclusions The Certification Process Study evaluated processes associated with the certification, operations, and maintenance of commercial transport airplanes. Particular attention was given to the processes associated with the interfaces between the certification, operations, and maintenance functions as depicted by the arrows in Figure 6. The study identified fifteen findings and two observations in the following categories: • Safety Assurance Processes •Aviation Safety Data Management • Maintenance/Operations/Certification Interfaces •Major Repairs and Modifications • Safety Oversight Processes The team identified four areas of commonality in the findings and observations (this list is not all-inclusive): Information Flow Critical information may not be available to those who could act upon it. Organizational barriers to communication, failure to recognize the need to communicate, information overload, and language differences may all contribute to information flow breakdowns. Human Factors Failure to account for the human element is a common thread in accidents. Faulty assumptions, incomplete understanding of tasks, and poor feedback of actual human responses may all contribute to mistakes or failures in the human/machine interface. Lessons Learned Significant safety issues learned through accidents are sometimes lost with time and must be re-learned at a very high price. The absence of a comprehensive lessons-learned database, general or non-existent requirements, constraints on information sharing, and loss of corporate knowledge may all contribute to problems being repeated. Accident Precursors Awareness that certain service incidents are effective indicators of the need for intervention measures requires airplane-level safety awareness acquired through both training and experience. Risk management tools and understanding of lessons learned are vital in developing the skills necessary to consistently recognize accident precursor events and initiate corrective actions. Figure 7 indicates how various other perspectives may be useful in identifying the commonalities among the findings and observations. It must be stressed that the findings and observations in this study are clearly interrelated and should not be addressed in isolation. Safety Awareness at the Airplane Level Many of the accidents reviewed during this study followed one or more previous incidents that were not acted upon because those involved in industry and government were unaware of the significance of what they had observed. Often, the reason for this lack of awareness was a failure to view the significance of the event at the airplane level rather than at the system or subsystem level. This airplane-level perspective allows the interface areas to be most apparent, such as human factors considerations of a maintenance task and specific flight crew procedures necessary for system failure intervention. This is also the attribute of a safety specialist that is most difficult to attain, as it depends to a very large extent on the experience of the individual combined with technical capability. Safety awareness at the airplane level is needed for all key safety specialists regardless of their organization and is achieved by both proper training and adequate experience, as illustrated in Figure 8. Safety initiatives could be better coordinated and more effective if the operator, manufacturer, and federal aviation administration could achieve and maintain this level of safety awareness. Cultural Change Traditional relationships among the regulators and industry have inherent constraints that have, in some cases, limited the ability to effectively identify and act on accident precursors. Further safety improvements will require significant intra- and inter-organizational cultural changes to facilitate a more open exchange of information. Regulatory solutions alone cannot achieve the desired results. Solutions are Interrelated Among Manufacturers, Operators, and FAA. Improvements to the safety processes identified in this study will require the manufacturer, operator, and federal aviation administration to work together with coordinated initiatives (see Figure 9). It will be necessary for each organization to enlist the support of a workforce with the necessary safety knowledge and experience, including expanding knowledge in the major interface areas such as those identified in this study. From the information gathered during this study, it is clear that process improvements could be applied in certain key areas, particularly those interfaces with safety implications. Process improvements alone will not improve safety unless regulators and industry work together towards this goal. It will require personnel with special skills, knowledge, and experience to recognize lessons learned and accident precursors and to properly apply risk management tools and techniques. Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) These programs are intended to provide air carriers with the opportunity to identify and report safety issues to management and the federal aviation administration for resolution without fear of punitive legal enforcement action being taken. These programs are designed to encourage participation from employee groups such as flight crew members, mechanics, flight attendants, and dispatchers. For example, a partnership between American Airlines, the pilots’ union, and the federal aviation administration encourages pilots to anonymously disclose safety problems for the purpose of sharing information. It is designed to identify and reduce or eliminate possible flight safety concerns, as well as minimize deviations from the regulations. Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) Administered by national aeronautics and space administration for the FAA, the Aviation Safety Report System receives, processes, analyzes, interprets, and reports safety data provided voluntarily by pilots, controllers, flight attendants, mechanics, and other users of the national airspace system. Reports may not be used for enforcement action by the FAA. The database information may be considered for making systemic safety changes. Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) FAA-Boeing partnership initiative that implemented the continued operational safety Working Agreement on October 1, 1999, to accomplish the following: • In-service events are screened by Boeing service engineering for reportable events. The list of events to be reported goes beyond Federal Aviation Regulation21.3 requirements in accordance with the continued operational safety Working Agreement. • Event reports are submitted by Internet file transfer and loaded into the Aircraft Certification Office database daily. The events are distributed and tracked within the federal aviation administration from event to closure or Airworthiness Directive issuance. federal aviation administration Chief Information Office (AIO-1) The federal aviation administration operates or develops over 640 information systems as part of carrying out its mission. The federal aviation administration must decide which information systems to buy off the shelf, which to develop and build, to retire, and which to upgrade, and then smartly execute those decisions. The main focus of this office is to implement new management techniques to improve these critical investment decisions and help manage them more effectively so as to receive maximum value for our scarce investment dollars. Damage Tolerance: The attribute of the structure that permits it to retain its required residual strength for a period of use after the structure has sustained a given level of fatigue, corrosion, or discrete source damage. Flight Operational Quality Assurance flight operations quality assurance programs would give the federal aviation administration access to in-flight recorded data collected by airlines to improve safety in the following areas: flight crew performance, training, air traffic procedures, airport maintenance and design, and aircraft operations and design. Airline participation is voluntary. The FAA, labor, and industry are working with national aeronautics and space administration Ames on research and development. A model program has been initiated with some major airlines. Global Aviation Information Network (GAIN) Global Aviation Information Network is designed to help the aviation industry prevent accidents by making safety information available to aviation professionals worldwide who can use it to improve safety. By learning more about potential problems, the Global Aviation Information Network participants can use the information to address problems proactively. Actions could include pilot training, procedural changes to manuals, modifications to air traffic control procedures, changes to maintenance or manufacturing procedures, and design changes. The privately owned and operated international system will draw from various worldwide aviation information sources. Metadata is the information that provides the unique identification of the data itself, a data fingerprint, and is used to facilitate data retrieval. National Aviation Safety Data Analysis Center (NASDAC) The NASDAC is an automated support capability that enables users to apply powerful state-of-the-art analysis tools to an integrated database containing safety data from multiple sources. The NASDAC database currently includes data from over 20 source systems. A walk-in NASDAC facility is open in the federal aviation administration Headquarters building. Program Tracking and Reporting System (PTRS) The PTRS system is a database management tool that is designed to record certain work activities in the Aviation Safety Program to assist program analysis and future planning. It provides a database to indicate geographic areas, organizations, and operators who have supported or have been supported by the safety program within the previous three years. Safety Performance Analysis System (SPAS) SPAS is a computer-based system designed to help inspectors identify potential safety risks by tracking the performance of operators, aircraft, and personnel. Service Difficult Report Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations requires that holders of certificates issued under parts 121, 125, 127, or 135 submit reports on certain specified failures, malfunctions, defects of specific systems and on all other failures, malfunctions, or defects that, in the opinion of the certificate holder, have endangered or may endanger the safe operation of an aircraft. Certificated domestic and foreign repair stations are also required to report defects or recurring unairworthy conditions on any aircraft, powerplant, propeller, or any component thereof to the FAA. Stovepiping The concept of stovepiping is derived from a factory setting, where separate ovens are burning fuel and emitting smoke and heat. Each stovepipe is a separate and distinct operation from the beginning of its process until the work cycle has been completed. In the context of this report, stovepiping is a euphemism for holding onto information or the absence or lack of coordination and communication among various functional lines of business.