Title: Implementing A Safety Management System In Design, Manufacturing, And Maintenance Organizations Author(s): International Industry Standard Category: Safety Tags: Safety, Management, System 1. INTRODUCTION This Standard is intended to enable the aviation industry to implement a Safety Management System (Safety Management System) consistent with the International Civil Aviation Organization’s (ICAO) Annex 19 "Safety Management" Second Edition, Appendix 2, to the Convention on International Civil Aviation. It can be used to support the demonstration of compliance with applicable Safety Management System requirements from Aviation Authorities or for voluntary Safety Management System implementation. international civil aviation organization Annex 19 establishes Standards and Recommended Practices (SARP) applicable to safety management functions related to or in direct support of, the safe operation of aircraft. Annex 19 prescribes that each State must require several organizations under its authority to implement an Safety Management System (e.g., organizations responsible for the type design or manufacture of aircraft, engines, or propellers in accordance with Annex 8, approved maintenance organizations providing services to operators of airplanes or helicopters engaged in international commercial air transport, in accordance with Annex 6, Part I or Part III, Section II, respectively). The industry anticipates that each Local Aviation Authority will implement Safety Management System regulations to a potentially wider scope than that defined by international civil aviation organization Annex 19. This Standard has been developed to consider the broadest scope of potential Safety Management System implementation in design, manufacturing, and maintenance organizations. Safety Management System is being introduced to improve aviation safety. When the term “Safety” is used in this document, it is defined as the state in which risks associated with aviation activities related to or in direct support of aircraft operation are reduced and controlled to an acceptable level. The main objective of an Safety Management System is to manage safety related to, or in direct support of, the safe operation of aircraft through the effective management of safety risks. It is a system designed to continuously improve safety by identifying hazards, collecting and analyzing data, and continuously assessing safety risks. An Safety Management System seeks to proactively assess and control risks before they result in aviation accidents and incidents. Safety Management System can be a complex topic with many aspects to consider, but the defining characteristic of an Safety Management System is that it is a decision-making system based on the collection and analysis of information that encompasses both reactive and proactive measures. It also aims to improve the safety performance of organizations by establishing and fostering a safety culture. Such a safety culture should be present at all levels and reflected in an active and visible management commitment and by individuals’ awareness of their role and influence on safety. An Safety Management System should not be implemented as an additional management system requirement superimposed on the existing rules but should be fully consistent with other existing organization management systems. Note: The table in Appendix 5 shows the correlation between international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2, this Safety Management System Standard, and the international aerospace quality group 9100:2016 and international aerospace quality group 9110:2016 Standards. The structure of an Safety Management System has been formalized in international civil aviation organization Annex 19 around four components: 1. Safety Policy and Objectives. 2. Safety Risk Management. 3. Safety Assurance. 4. Safety Promotion. The international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual (SMM, Doc 9859) also mentions Safety Management System as a system commensurate with the organization’s regulatory obligations and safety goals. This standard recognizes the variability of organizations implementing Safety Management System requirements. It provides guidance with enough flexibility to reflect the size and structure of organizations and the complexity of their activities, products, and services. It stresses the interest of keeping the system as simple as possible for its effective and efficient operation. This standard guides implementing Safety Management System in Design, Manufacturing, and Maintenance organizations. It is expected to be usable as Guidance Material (GM) and Acceptable Means of Compliance (AMC) to the corresponding Annex 19 transposition into aviation safety regulations [e.g., in the USA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has published 14 code of federal regulations Part 5; in Europe, the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) intends to publish the Safety Management System requirements for Design, Manufacturing and Maintenance organizations in Part 21 and Part 145 (EASA Rulemaking Task 0251)]. This standard can be used to demonstrate compliance with federal aviation administration 14 code of federal regulations Part 5 under the conditions specified in Appendix 4, “Compliance with federal aviation administration 14 code of federal regulations Part 5.” The Aerospace Industries Association of America (AIA) has issued a National Aerospace Standard (NAS), “Safety Management System Practices for Design and Manufacturing”: National Aerospace Standard 9927. The federal aviation administration has recognized Section I as being consistent with 14 code of federal regulations Part 5 and international civil aviation organization Annex 19, Appendix 2. The NAS Standard has been considered as an input for developing this standard. Safety Management System requirements may also be applied to military regulations (just as airworthiness certification requirements are used in a military context). The present standard may be considered guidance material and an acceptable means of compliance with military regulation. international civil aviation organization Annex 19 introduces the need for a voluntary incident reporting system, using the principles of “just culture” to encourage individuals to report safety-related information. However, it should not absolve individuals of their normal responsibilities. In a European context, "Just Culture" is also required by EU No 376/2014. This Standard considers “just culture” principles from Annex 19 and EU No 376/2014. This standard has been developed by a group of representatives of the aviation design, manufacturing, maintenance (and manufacturers holding a Continuing Airworthiness Management – continuing airworthiness management organisation - approval 2. SCOPE OF THE STANDARD 2.1. Purpose: This standard provides: Detailed guidance to implement Safety Management System requirements and guidelines for interface management, including the sharing of safety-related information between organizations with Safety Management System obligations (such as design, manufacturing, maintenance, continuing airworthiness management, training organizations, and operators) and the relevant aviation authorities. It also considers corporate structure and processes to cover some or all elements common across domains (such as accountability, safety policy, hazards identification and safety risks management principles, safety data collection and assessment, and safety awareness and training. This standard is intended to provide a means of complying with civil aviation regulations but could also be used to comply with other regulations (e.g., military regulations) when acceptable to the relevant authorities. Corporate Safety Management System is not compulsory but could facilitate consistent Safety Management System implementation in companies holding multiple approvals and/or certificates. The appendixes attached to this standard provide supplemental/additional guidance and examples for several topics addressed in the core chapters. 2.2. Intended application: This standard addresses the implementation of the Safety Management System elements within organizations undertaking design, manufacturing, or maintenance responsibilities and activities or both as: • Approved organizations (holding an organization approval, e.g., Design Organization Approval, Product Organization Approval, Approved Maintenance Organization/Maintenance Organization Approval) • Other organizations (holding a certificate for design or manufacturing or both, e.g., TC, PC, parts manufacturer approval holder), including those from the supply chain (i.e., suppliers). This standard can be implemented voluntarily by organizations that are not required to implement an Safety Management System. The extent to which Safety Management System is applied to an organization depends on the organization’s approval scope or the applicable system description when organization approval is not required. Although this standard addresses implementation of the Safety Management System elements within organizations responsible for aircraft, parts and appliance design, manufacturing, and maintenance, it can also be used by organizations responsible for aircraft continuing airworthiness management, commercial or non-commercial (private) standard operations, air traffic services, training of crew or maintenance certifying staff or both, and certified aerodrome as a baseline to implement an Safety Management System, when acceptable to the relevant Aviation Authority. Note: All the supporting reference documentation listed in Chapter 3, including European Unionregulation No 1321/2014 (Part M-Continuing Airworthiness Management Organization), was considered while drafting this standard. 4. TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 4.1. Terms Throughout this standard, the following verbal forms differentiate requirements from provisions where a choice exists: Understanding: Provides explanations and information to assist the user in interpreting the requirements contained in international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2. Means of compliance: Serves as a means by which the requirements contained in international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2 can be met. Can: Denotes a possibility or a capability. May: Denotes permission. Must: Denotes necessary conditions. Shall: Denotes a requirement. Compliance with this is mandatory, and no alternative may be applied. Should: Denotes a recommendation 4.2. Definitions The following definitions are either based on those in the reference documents listed in Chapter 3, “Supporting reference documentation,” or established by the drafting group of this standard. Accident An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft occurs between the times any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight until all such persons have disembarked, in which: a) A person on board or on the ground is fatally or seriously injured. b) The aircraft sustains damage or structural failure. c) The aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible. (Source: international civil aviation organization Annex 13). Note: In principle, this definition is also valid for Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) when their operation takes place between the time they become airborne and the time they land on the ground or in the water. Aircraft Manned or unmanned aerial system (with or without pilot). (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). The climate of the Safety Management System is the perceived value placed on safety in an organization at a particular point in time (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). Continuing Airworthiness Management A process by which a type certificated aircraft is thereafter kept in a condition where it remains airworthy, compliant with the technical conditions fixed to the issue of the Certificate of Airworthiness, and kept in a condition for safe operation (technically fit for flight). (Source: based on international civil aviation organization Document No 9713 – 1998). Note: Continuing Airworthiness is defined in the European regulation (EC No. 1321/2014 Part M article 2) as all processes ensuring that, at any time in its operating life, the aircraft complies with the airworthiness requirements in force and is in a condition for safe operation. Continued Airworthiness The post-certification phase of an aircraft’s design life, during which the design approval holder has duties to collect data on “failures, malfunctions, and defects” (see 21.A.3) to identify potential threats to the continuing airworthiness of the aircraft, and for which phase the design approval holder is required to make available ‘instructions for continued airworthiness’ to ensure the safe operation and support the development of the operator’s maintenance programs. (Source: based on EU No 748/2012 Part 21 wording). Note: The activities related to failures, malfunctions, and defects in European Unionregulation (Part 21.A.3) are referred to as Continued Operational Safety (COS) in US regulation (14 code of federal regulations Part 21.3). Corporate Safety Management System Corporate governance, structure, and processes to cover some or all elements common across domains (such as accountability, safety policy, hazards identification and safety risks management principles, safety data collection and assessment, safety awareness, and training). Corporate Safety Management System is not compulsory but could facilitate consistent Safety Management System implementation in companies holding multiple approvals and/or certificates. (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). Event: Any anomaly in operating an aviation product or performing an organization’s activity. (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). Foreseeably, identifying every conceivable or theoretically possible hazard is neither possible nor desirable; therefore, judgment is required to determine adequate detail in hazard identification. Organizations should diligently identify significant and reasonably foreseeable hazards related to their operations. (Source: National Aerospace Standard 9927). Note: Regarding product design, the term “foreseeably” is intended to be consistent with its use in airworthiness regulations, policy, and guidance. Hazard: A condition or an object with the potential to cause or contribute to an aircraft incident or accident. (Source: international civil aviation organization Annex 19). Incident: An occurrence, other than an accident, associated with the operation of an aircraft that affects or could affect the safety of the operation. (Source: international civil aviation organization Annex 13). Just Culture: A culture where individuals are not punished for actions, omissions, or decisions taken by them that are commensurate with their experience and training but where gross negligence, wilful violations, and destructive acts are not tolerated. (Source: based on EU No 376/2014). Management System: A framework of policies, processes, and procedures an organization uses to ensure it can fulfill all the tasks required to achieve its objectives. (Source: based on international standard organization 9000:2015). Occurrence: Any safety-related event that endangers or which, if not corrected or addressed, could endanger an aircraft, its occupants, or any other person and includes, in particular, an accident or serious incident (as defined in international civil aviation organization Annex 13). (Source: European UnionNo 376/2014). Organization In the scope of this standard, any entity, approved or non-approved, independent of size, performing an activity in the design, manufacturing, or maintenance of aircraft, propellers, aircraft engines, or parts and appliances. international civil aviation organization is using the term “service provider” for those organizations. (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). Procedure: A specified way to carry out an activity or a process. (Source: international standard organization 9000:2015). Note: When a procedure is documented, the term “written procedure” or “documented procedure” is frequently used. The document that contains a procedure can be called a “procedure document.” Process: A set of interrelated or interacting activities that transforms input elements into outputs, respecting constraints, requiring resources, meeting a defined mission, corresponding to a specific purpose adapted to a given environment. (Source: based on international standard organization 9000:2015). Product A broad term that includes aircraft, aircraft engine, aircraft propeller, aircraft part or appliance or both, their subcomponents (hardware and software), and associated services such as documentation necessary for operation and maintenance (e.g., Instructions for Continued Airworthiness, Aircraft Flight Manual). (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). Quality escape: Any product released by an internal or external supplier or sub-tier supplier that is subsequently deemed nonconforming to contract or product specification requirements. (Source: AS/EN/SJAC 9131). Risk: The combination of predicted severity (criticality) and likelihood (probability) of the potential effect of a hazard. (Source: National Aerospace Standard 9927). Risk Control A means to reduce or eliminate the effects of hazards. (Source: National Aerospace Standard9927). Risk Mitigation: The process of incorporating defenses or preventive controls to lower the severity or likelihood of a hazard’s projected consequence. (Source: international civil aviation organization Doc. 9859 Safety Management Manual). Safety The state in which risks associated with aviation activities, related to or in direct support of the operation of aircraft, are reduced and controlled to an acceptable level. (Source: international civil aviation organization Annex 19). Note: risks of harm to persons or damage to property are to be considered. Safety Assurance (SA) Processes within the Safety Management System function systematically to ensure the performance and effectiveness of safety risk controls and that the organization meets or exceeds its safety objectives through collecting, analyzing, and assessing information. (Source: National Aerospace Standard 9927). Safety Culture: A set of enduring values, behaviors, and attitudes regarding safety management shared by every member at every level of an organization. Note: Safety culture aims to enhance the organization's employees’ understanding of their role in safety, to share and promote safety values, and to encourage positive behavior and mindset to address any identified safety-related questions or concerns in an environment of trust and mutual respect. A strong safety culture goes beyond mere compliance with the rules and regulations (i.e., initial and continuing airworthiness requirements) (Source: based on international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual). Safety data Data recorded for further use in Safety Management System activities (e.g., events reports, safety risk assessments). Such safety data is collected from proactive or reactive safety-related activities, including but not limited to: • Accident or incident investigations. • Safety reporting. • Continuing airworthiness reporting. • Product operational performance monitoring. • Inspections, audits, surveys. • Safety studies and reviews. Some Safety data can be used as Safety Management System data. (Source: based on international civil aviation organization Annex 19). Safety Management System (Safety Management System): A systematic approach to managing safety, including the necessary organizational structures, accountability, responsibilities, policies, and procedures. (Source: international civil aviation organization Annex 19). Safety Management System data Data used to ensure Safety Management System performance. Examples: • Hazards report register and samples of reports. • Outputs of risk assessments. • Safety performance indicators and related charts. • Record of completed or in-progress safety assessments. • Safety Management System internal review or audit records. • Safety promotion records. • Personnel Safety Management System/safety training records. • Safety Management System/safety committee meeting minutes. • Safety Management System implementation plan (during the implementation process). (Source: Safety Management System Standard Drafting Group). Safety objective: A measurable goal or desirable outcome related to safety. (Source: National Aerospace Standard 9927). Safety performance Realized or actual safety accomplishment relative to the organization’s objectives. (Source: National Aerospace Standard 9927). Safety policy is an organization’s fundamental approach to managing safety that is to be adopted within the organization and further defines the organization's management’s commitment to safety and overall safety vision. (Source: Safety Management International Collaboration Group Terminology). Safety promotion: A combination of training and communication of safety information to support the implementation and operation of an Safety Management System in an organization, enhancing its safety culture. (Source: based on Safety Management International Collaboration Group Terminology). Safety Risk Management (SRM) is a process within the Safety Management System that identifies the hazard, analyzes, assesses, and controls related risks. (Source: based on Safety Management International Collaboration Group terminology). System Description: A description of an organizational system, including its structure, policies, communications, processes, products, and operations, is used to determine the scope and perimeter of the system subject to Safety Risk Management. This allows the understanding of critical factors or features for the purpose of identifying hazards. It is updated whenever a newly introduced element or change to the internal or external situation could affect safety. (Source: based on National Aerospace Standard 9927). 5. APPLICABLE REQUIREMENTS This standard is intended to provide a means of compliance with Safety Management System requirements enforced by international civil aviation organization Member States and based upon international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2 (e.g., 14 code of federal regulations Part 5). 6. UNDERSTANDING AND MEANS OF COMPLIANCE WITH Safety Management System REQUIREMENTS This chapter provides guidance to further understand the international civil aviation organization Annex 19 framework for implementing and maintaining an Safety Management System. The framework comprises four components and twelve elements forming the minimum requirements as follows: 1. Safety policy and objectives 1.1 Management commitment. 1.2 Safety accountability and responsibilities. 1.3 Appointment of key safety personnel. 1.4 Coordination of emergency response planning. 1.5 Safety Management System documentation. 2. Safety risk management 2.1 Hazard identification. 2.2 Safety risk assessment and mitigation. 3. Safety assurance 3.1 Safety performance monitoring and measurement. 3.2 The management of change. 3.3 Continuous improvement of the Safety Management System. 4. Safety promotion 4.1 Training and education. 4.2 Safety communication. This chapter further describes the components and elements shown in Figure 1, as well as the related paragraphs and references. Safety Management System continuous improvement is based on safety performance monitoring and measurement, which are further detailed in sections 6.3.1 and 6.3.3. The structure of this chapter is as follows: • Within grey blocks: Safety Management System Standards and Recommended Practices from international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2 for each Safety Management System component and element. • Underneath each grey block: Guidance for further understanding of each Safety Management System component and element and for associated means of compliance. Note: Parts of the Annex 19 requirements may not need any additional "understanding" statement. The broad traceability to Annex 19 requirements is provided in chapter 6 with the 12 elements. However, line to line traceability is not enforced. 6.1 Safety Policy and Objectives 6.1.1 Management commitment international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 1.1 Management commitment 1.1.1 The service provider shall define its safety policy in accordance with international and national requirements. The safety policy shall: a) reflect organizational commitment regarding safety; including the promotion of a positive safety culture; b) include a clear statement about the provision of the necessary resources for the implementation of the safety policy; c) include safety reporting procedures; d) clearly indicate which types of behaviors are unacceptable related to the service provider’s aviation activities and include the circumstances under which disciplinary action would not apply; e) be signed by the accountable executive of the organization; f) be communicated, with visible endorsement, throughout the organization; and g) be periodically reviewed to ensure it remains relevant and appropriate to the service provider. 1.1.2 Taking due account of its safety policy, the service provider shall define safety objectives. The safety objectives shall: a) form the basis for safety performance monitoring and measurement as required by 3.1.2; b) reflect the service provider’s commitment to maintain or continuously improve the overall effectiveness of the Safety Management System; c) be communicated throughout the organization; and d) be periodically reviewed to ensure they remain relevant and appropriate to the service provider. Note: Guidance on setting safety objectives is provided in the Safety Management Manual (SMM) (Doc 9859). 6.1.1.1 Safety policy Understanding The organization's Safety Policy forms the foundation of its Safety Management System. Safety should be identified as a top priority and value for the organization. The safety policy defines the organization objectives, assigns responsibilities, and sets standards. The safety policy should describe in broad terms the vision of the organization for safety management; how it intends to deal with safety related topics; and how it will create and foster a safety culture at all levels in the organizational structure, with active and visible commitment. Considering each of the above-mentioned international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2 requirements, it means that the safety policy: a) Conveys management’s commitment to the safety performance of the organization toward its employees. b) Addresses the provision of material, human and financial resources sufficient to perform the planned activities of the Safety Management System. c) Includes (but may not be limited to) safety reporting procedures relative to product safety, including continued airworthiness data collection and reporting of fleet events, as well as internal organization reporting of safety issues and risks, such as voluntary employee reporting. d) Includes the establishment of a "Just Culture" policy. Individuals are not punished for actions, omissions or erroneous decisions that are commensurate with their experience, training and internal procedures. However, gross negligence, wilful violations and destructive acts are not tolerated. For organizations subject to European Unionregulations, this definition (from EU No 376/2014) is considered minimum but sufficient for this objective. Other organizations may consider this definition when establishing policies for behaviors that are unacceptable and the circumstances under which disciplinary action would not apply. While a reporting system is a necessary part of an Safety Management System, organizations may adapt their confidential employee reporting system, depending on the maturity level of their safety culture. e) Is signed by the Safety Accountable Executive as the organization's safety champion. f) Is visible to all levels, from a positive viewpoint. Safety policy should be promoted to all employees with the active involvement of top and middle management. The purpose is to foster a Safety Culture within the organization. g) Is reviewed periodically to check its validity and relevance to the actual safety performance of the organization. Continuous improvement of the Safety Management System can lead to revisions of the safety policy to adapt safety priorities and objectives. Means of Compliance The safety policy is a high level document stating principles and broad objectives. It should be kept simple and to the point, with details of the organization and Safety Management System processes and procedures being described in a separate Safety Management System manual (Safety Management System manual), or equivalent document. The safety policy could be a standalone document or integrated into existing management system documentation (e.g. a design organization handbook). Safety should be highlighted as a primary responsibility of all managers with a strong and clear commitment to fulfil relevant legal requirements and applicable standards. For b) and e) above, depending on the structure and governance of the organization, final decisions on allocation of resources may be made at various levels. The Safety Accountable Executive (as defined in the international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual) may be appointed by the Senior Executive (e.g., the Chied Executive Officer) for all safety activities and be responsible for the allocation and management of resources for these activities. If the Safety Accountable Executive does not have this responsibility, the highest level of management must show their commitment. The person(s) making final decisions on resources allocated to the Safety Management System must jointly sign the safety policy alongside the Safety Accountable Executive or use another method that shows a joint commitment. For c) and d) above, European legislation ("Occurrence Reporting" rule EC 376/2014 and related Guidance Material) provides a detailed legal framework to the "Just Culture" topic. A case by case assessment of behaviours may be necessary. Accordingly, the safety policy statement should be made with proper consideration of the applicable local company rules. For f) above, the safety policy document needs to be communicated throughout the organization. It should provide a high level of information, be convincing and easy to understand. An example of a safety policy statement is proposed in Appendix 3 “Safety Management System Manual/Documentation”. 6.1.1.2 Safety Objectives Understanding Safety objectives should support the safety policy. There are several possible objectives that differ in scope and timescale. Safety objectives are established to continuously improve the safety of aircraft operations and the organization performance with regards to product safety. These safety objectives should be meaningful to the organization, and thus adapted to the type of business and to the volume of safety data collected. Other objectives are related to the development and performance of the organization itself. Safety objectives should be sufficiently detailed to ensure their fulfilment can be demonstrated, as far as possible using a measurement mechanism (qualitative or quantitative). The purpose of safety performance monitoring is to appropriately assess the achievement of the organization’s safety objectives (see §6.3 “Safety Assurance” for further details). Safety objectives should be meaningful, realistic and proportionate to the organization and to the maturity of its Safety Management System. Means of Compliance a) The organization should define safety objectives reflecting the in-service safety performance of its products/parts/appliances (e.g., based on the analyses performed through the Continued Airworthiness process) as well as objectives related to the function of the Safety Management System itself. These objectives should include monitoring correct deployment of the Safety Management System, measurement of its activity, and allocation of appropriate means and staff competencies. These safety objectives should reflect the identified improvement in safety, based on the current situation. They should be defined as Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound (SMART). Safety objectives may consider the management of interfaces within the organization as well as with other organizations The safety objectives may be presented as a standalone document to constitute the organization’s safety performance dashboard, which can also be used to report the safety performance results (an example of safety performance dashboard is given in Appendix 3). b) The establishment of objectives should be to drive the continuous improvement of the organizations safety performance. It may be appropriate to set strategic (long term) and tactical (short to medium term) goals and objectives to enable periodic reviews and performance assessment. c) During the process of communicating the safety policy and associated objectives to the whole organization, care should be taken to describe the flow-down of general organization-level objectives in relation to "local" safety objectives. These local objectives aim to show the contribution to safety for an individual/group of employees. Each employee should be aware of the potential consequences of his/her actions and behaviour and of its positive contribution to the Safety Management System through the understanding of the safety objectives. d) The Safety Management System should include a periodic review of safety objectives, for example on a yearly basis, or at a frequency adapted to the organization’s specificities, changes and safety achievements. This review should be aligned with the issuance of the safety performance results in terms of achieving the objectives. 6.1.2 Safety Accountability and Responsibilities international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 1.2 Safety accountability and responsibilities The service provider shall: a) identify the accountable executive who, irrespective of other functions, is accountable to the organization for the implementation and maintenance of an effective Safety Management System; b) clearly define lines of safety accountability throughout the organization, including a direct accountability for safety on the part of senior management; c) identify the responsibilities of all members of management, irrespective of other functions, as well as of employees, with respect to the safety performance of the organization; d) document and communicate safety accountability, responsibilities and authorities throughout the organization; and e) define the levels of management with authority to make decisions regarding safety risk tolerability. Understanding The “Safety Accountable Executive” or “Safety Accountable Manager” is a person accountable (having ultimate responsibility) for the Safety Management System within the organization. This person’s authority and responsibilities may include, but are not limited to: a) Provision and allocate human, technical, financial or other resources necessary for the effective and efficient performance of Safety Management System. b) Direct responsibility for the conduct of the organization’s affairs. c) Final authority over operations under the certificate/approval of the organization. d) Establish and promote the safety policy. e) Establish the organization’s safety objectives and safety targets. f) Acts as the organization’s safety champion. g) Final responsibility for the resolution of all safety issues. h) Establish and maintain the organization’s competence to learn from the analysis of data collected through its safety reporting system. Safety accountability defines the obligation of the responsible person to demonstrate the satisfactory execution of his/her safety responsibilities. Safety responsibility can be delegated (i.e., cascaded down) within the scope of the defined job responsibilities, provided such delegation is documented. To ensure the necessary safety awareness and commitment of all personnel involved in safety related tasks, the safety accountability and responsibilities in the organization should be clearly and comprehensively defined, documented, and communicated throughout the organization. When identifying responsibilities of management staff and employees, organizations should consider which employees are included in safety related tasks and activities. Means of Compliance For efficiency, each company holding multiple certificates/organization approvals may organize the accountabilities through different schemes according to each company’s complexity, needs and constraints. Such a scheme would be acceptable provided each certificate/organization approval holder meets the requirements for safety accountabilities. Examples of schemes include, but are not limited to: • One Safety Accountable Manager for each organization (e.g. design, manufacturing or maintenance. • A single Safety Accountable Manager at an appropriate management level to cover the overall Safety Management System of the company. 6.1.3 Appointment of Key Safety Personnel international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 1.3 Appointment of key safety personnel The service provider shall appoint a safety manager who is responsible for the implementation and maintenance of the Safety Management System. Note: Depending on the size of the service provider and the complexity of its aviation products or services, the responsibilities for the implementation and maintenance of the Safety Management System may be assigned to one or more persons, fulfilling the role of safety manager, as their sole function or combined with other duties, provided these do not result in any conflicts of interest. Means of Compliance The allocation of Safety Management System management responsibilities is at the discretion of the organization. This includes the appointment of personnel directly responsible to the Safety Accountable Executive for providing guidance, direction and support for the planning, implementation and operation of the organization’s Safety Management System. This could be their sole function, acting as dedicated safety manager(s), or combined with other duties provided those duties do not result in any conflicts of interest. In small/simple organizations, these responsibilities could also be undertaken by the Safety Accountable Executive. The organization is responsible for: Ensuring that the Safety Management System operates as defined and is effective. Collecting and analysing safety information in a timely manner. Administering safety-related surveys. Monitoring and evaluating the results of corrective actions. Ensuring that risk assessments are conducted when applicable; Monitoring safety concerns reported within the aviation community that could affect the organization or its products/services. Ensuring that safety-related information, including organizational goals and objectives, are made available to all personnel through established communication processes. Providing periodic reports on safety performance. 6.1.4 Coordination of Emergency Response Planning international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 1.4 Coordination of emergency response planning The service provider required to establish and maintain an emergency response plan for accidents and incidents in aircraft operations and other aviation emergencies shall ensure that the emergency response plan is properly coordinated with the emergency response plans of those organizations it must interface with during the provision of its products and services. Understanding An Emergency Response Plan (ERP) documents the actions to be taken by all responsible personnel during emergencies. The purpose of an Emergency Response Plan is to ensure that there is an orderly and efficient transition to and from emergency operations, including assignment of emergency responsibilities and delegation of authority. Authorization for action by key personnel is also contained in the plan, as well as the means to coordinate efforts necessary to cope with the emergency. The overall objective is the safe continuation of operations. Establishing an Emergency Response Plan is not required by international civil aviation organization Annex 19; therefore, unless required by other applicable regulation, Emergency Response Plan coordination does not apply to design, manufacturing and maintenance organizations. However, establishing an Emergency Response Plan is considered as a good practice, in design, manufacturing and maintenance organizations when the organization is performing flight operations under special permits to fly. Such organizations may then also need to coordinate relevant activities with organizations required to have an Emergency Response Plan. A similar artefact or method may also be used when a significant disruption (unrelated to the safety of flight operations) occurs to the organization itself, to ensure business continuity and crisis management. Note 1: The Aerospace Industries Association Standard National Aerospace Standard 9927 states that the Emergency Response Plan as mentioned in 14CFR Part 5 does not apply for voluntary implementation of Safety Management System in US Design & Manufacturing organizations. Note 2: A voluntary Emergency Response Plan should not be subject to auditing by authorities in the context of this standard. With regards to safety of products, provisions for emergency responses which may be identified under different titles in different organizations (e.g., crisis management rules, crisis response policy, accident response plan), are being implemented by organizations to comply with continued airworthiness requirements (e.g. Part 21.A.3). These activities should be coordinated on an ad hoc basis with all involved parties in case of an accident or serious incident. Means of Compliance Establishing an Emergency Response Plan is not required by international civil aviation organization Annex 19; therefore, unless required by other applicable regulation, Emergency Response Plan coordination does not apply to design, manufacturing and maintenance organizations. 6.1.5 Safety Management System Documentation international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 1.5 Safety Management System documentation 1.5.1 The service provider shall develop and maintain an Safety Management System manual that describes its: a) safety policy and objectives; b) Safety Management System requirements; c) Safety Management System processes and procedures; and; d) accountability, responsibilities and authorities for Safety Management System processes and procedures. 1.5.2 The service provider shall develop and maintain Safety Management System operational records as part of its Safety Management System documentation. Note: Depending on the size of the service provider and the complexity of its aviation products or services, the Safety Management System manual and Safety Management System operational records may be in the form of stand-alone documents or may be integrated with other organizational documents (or documentation) maintained by the service provider. Understanding The extent of Safety Management System documentation can differ from one organization to another due to: Size of the organization and type of activities. Complexity of processes and their interactions. Each organization should ensure the adequate control and maintenance of these documents. They should be reviewed periodically and updated as needed (e.g., on a yearly basis). a) Safety Policy and Safety Objectives Safety policy as understood in section 6.1.1 determines the safety objectives. The objectives must be practical, achievable, regularly reviewed and reassessed, and communicated to the staff. The safety policy and safety objectives should be documented and may be independent documents or be included in the Safety Management System manual. b) Safety Management System Requirements As part of the Safety Management System documentation, a list of all Safety Management System requirements applicable to the organization, both internal (e.g., organization, corporate) and external (e.g. authorities, customers) should be documented. c) Safety Management System Processes and Procedures Processes and procedures should include the steps and methods that will be used to meet applicable requirements and to achieve the expected outputs. The structure and format of the documented processes and procedures, and their method of recording (hard copy or digital media or both) should be defined by the organization. d) Accountability, Responsibilities and Authorities for Safety Management System Processes and Procedures Documentation should identify which top manager is accountable for the Safety Management System, and identify the responsibilities and authorities of key stakeholders with respect to the safety performance of the organization. Responsibility, authority and interrelationships may be indicated by such means as organization charts, flow charts or job descriptions or both (not limited to top managers or key stakeholders). e) Safety Management System Manual The Safety Management System documentation may include a top-level document (Safety Management System Manual or similar), which describes the organization’s Safety Management System implementation of the four components and twelve elements described in this chapter. The Safety Management System Manual may be a standalone document or it can be embedded within an existing organization description document (e.g. manufacturing organization exposition/manual). Where details of the organization’s Safety Management System processes are already addressed in existing documents, appropriate cross referencing to such documents is sufficient. Means of Compliance The manner and format of documentation is at the discretion of the organization.It may be embedded within existing documentation of any other management system implemented by the organization. Examples of Safety Management System documentation are provided in Appendix 3 (e.g. Safety Management System Manual, Safety Policy). 6.2 Safety Risk Management The aim of Safety Risk Management (SRM) is to prevent the occurrence of serious incidents or accidents. To that end, Safety Risk Management identifies hazards, analyses, assesses and controls safety risks. For organizations which do not hold an organization approval (e.g., Design Organization Approval, Product Organization Approval, Maintenance Organization Approval); aSystem description is a prerequisite for Safety Risk Management application (hazard identification, safety risks assessment and mitigation). Some other national authority’s approvals (e.g., Federal Aviation Administration ODA) do not include a definition of the organization holding the approval; therefore a system description is required to provide an overview of the organization covered by the application of Safety Risk Management. At all levels, the organization should define actions to maintain safety risks at an acceptable level. 6.2.1 Hazard Identification international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 2.1 Hazard identification 2.1.1 The service provider shall develop and maintain a process to identify hazards associated with its aviation products or services. 2.1.2 Hazard identification shall be based on a combination of reactive and proactive methods. Understanding Hazard identification enables identifying “safety issues” or “threats” (referred to as a hazard) that require application of an Safety Risk Management and Safety Assurance (SA). This allows the organization to allocate safety management resources to sources of potential significant safety risk, and avoid devoting resources to lower or insignificant risk. Hazards can originate from technical, environmental, human and organizational factors. With regard to design, certification, manufacturing, in-service and maintenance activities, hazards are the conditions that could foreseeably lead to a noncompliant or nonconforming product that, if not addressed, could rise to an unacceptable level of risk. Means of Compliance Hazard identification consists of: • Analyzing the high risk areas of the organization activities or organization changes. • Analyzing data from both internal and external sources (e.g. continued airworthiness data, operators’ feedback, subcontractors’ information, hazards identified by Authorities or data from voluntary reporting). Hazards can be identified based on data from events that have occurred (reactive methods) or in anticipation of potential events that could lead to an unacceptable risk (proactive methods). Organizations should have established and documented methodologies and processes for monitoring reported events and occurrences such as the following: • For manufacturing or maintenance activities or both: FOD (Foreign Object Damage). Any work performed not in accordance with approved data. Any deviation of a tool detected during calibration. • For continued airworthiness activities: In service events (e.g., failures, malfunctions, or defects). Quality escapes. Flight test events. Supplier notices of escapement. Noncompliance’s related to product certificates or approvals. Any of these types of events or occurrences could be used to identify aviation safety hazards. To enhance Hazard identification, the organization should implement a voluntary employee reporting system based on its Just Culture policy, which it has defined and deployed. See § 6.1.1.1. See Appendix 1 for “Best Practices for Hazard Identification”. 6.2.2 Safety Risk Assessment and Mitigation international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 2.2 Safety risk assessment and mitigation The service provider shall develop and maintain a process that ensures analysis, assessment and control of the safety risks associated with identified hazards. Note: The process may include predictive methods of safety data analysis. Understanding Safety Risk Management requires the analysis of safety risks to determine the severity and likelihood associated with identified hazards. Various guidance/methods (see Means of Compliance below) are available for analyzing risk. Safety risk must be assessed to determine its acceptability. An appropriate quantitative or qualitative method can be used. Aspects to consider in the assessment may include technical, processes, human behaviours and organizational (including interface management). Product risk assessment is necessary. A large part of it may already be controlled in the frame of compliance with other regulations such as the following: During design and certification, compliance with existing certification procedural and airworthiness regulations, defines an acceptable safety risk. During manufacturing, a product’s conformity to its approved design and conditions for safe operation are already defined by Part 21 requirements. The associated manufacturing and conformity attestation processes are an acceptable way to achieve an acceptable level of safety risk. For example, conditions such as assembly variations or a need to repair damaged parts or assemblies may arise during manufacturing. In such a situation, the manufacturing organization, in coordination with the design organization, may use approved processes that address these situations to ensure the product conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. During the continued airworthiness phase(including in-service and maintenance), safety risk acceptability is defined by the continued airworthiness for in service products. Safety risk acceptability during the continued airworthiness phase should be based on consideration of the applicable airworthiness standards and the assurance that no unsafe condition exists. A product in an unsafe condition implies unacceptable safety risk and requires appropriate safety risk management. The product risk assessment should be completed with systemic risk assessment in the aim to also address human and organizational aspects. Risk assessment and mitigation should include the following activities: 1. System description. 2. Hazard and consequence identification. 3. Estimation of the severity and likelihood of the consequences of the hazard occurring. 4. Evaluation of the risk and associated decision making. 5. Risk mitigation and safety action(s). 6. Claims, arguments and evidence that the safety action(s) have been met and documented in a safety case. Means of Compliance It is up to the organization to select the methods and tools to be implemented for the purpose of Safety Risk Management. Engineering judgement/qualitative assessment should be considered as minimum acceptable means to identify and assess safety risks. Various methods, techniques and tools can be used for hazard identification and risk assessment. Whatever the selected method, the risk assessment should always focus on impacts on product safety in operation: • Risk assessment techniques (source international standard organization 31010): ü Brainstorming. ü Checklist. ü Root cause analysis. ü Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA). ü Fault Tree Analysis (FTA). ü Decision tree. ü Bow tie analysis. ü Monte Carlo simulation. ü Consequence/likelihood matrix. European Risk Classification Scheme (ERCS) (source: being published as linked to EU 2015/1018 regulation). Safety Risk Assessment matrix (source CS/FARxx.1309). Airline Risk Management Solutions (ARMS). Risk analysis methods at product level (source: society of automotive engineers ARP4761): ü Functional Hazard Assessment (FHA). ü Preliminary System Safety Assessment (PSSA). ü System Safety Assessment (SSA). ü Dependence diagrams. ü Markov Analysis. ü Zonal Safety Analysis (ZSA). Note: It is neither possible nor desirable to perform safety risk assessments for all changes. Only changes that potentially have a substantive impact on safety or the management of safety are subject to Safety Risk Management (cf. §6.3.2 Management of Changes) or both. Examples of situations where Safety Risk Management should be applied by different types of organizations are listed in Appendix 1 “Best practices for Safety Risk Management”. Organizations implementing a process for continued airworthiness already have the main foundations for collecting, analyzing and mitigating risks related to the product. This process which includes failure, malfunction and defects collection, risk analysis and actions to maintain product airworthiness is a major contributor to Safety Risk Management and an input to the safety assurance process, as described in §6.3.1.. Continued airworthiness also includes contributions from all involved stakeholders, such as design, manufacturing and maintenance organizations. Continued airworthiness activities should be complemented with proactive safety risk management (product safety enhancement beyond continued airworthiness duties). Indeed, the continued airworthiness data/information are also key source data for proactive risk assessment for products in operation. 6.3 Safety Assurance Safety Assurance (SA) relies on the following activities: Safety performance monitoring and measurement. Process for the management of changes. Continuous improvement of the Safety Management System. Safety Assurance should be achieved by monitoring the activities of the Safety Management System. Thus, Safety Assurance requires monitoring, gathering and analyzing of data and assessment of the performance. Safety performance measurement (see Annex 19 Appendix 2 Requirement 3.1) is best understood as an assessment of the capability to manage risk. It is a determination of the processes’ success in managing risk and the resulting effectiveness of the implemented risk controls, from both a product and organizational perspective. Safety Assurance also requires a process for managing changes (see Annex 19 Appendix 2 Requirement 3.2) that monitors for substantive changes in the operating environment whether planned or unplanned, self-induced or as a result of external influences, to ensure the changes will not lead to unacceptable risk. Substantive changes to the Safety Management System also need an assessment to measure that the Safety Management System performance is not degraded. Safety Assurance is also used to identify areas for, and to drive the continuous improvement of the Safety Management System processes (see Annex 19 Appendix 2 Requirement 3.3). Safety Assurance is an iterative process where performance requirements will evolve with the Safety Management System maturity (see chapter 8 “Safety Management System Implementation Plan”). The Safety Management System should be designed such that ineffective controls, new hazards, or potential hazards identified by the safety performance assessment are fed back to the Safety Risk Management process for hazard identification, risk analysis, risk assessment, and risk control. How to perform data acquisition? Acquiring safety data and Safety Management System data in the context of safety performance monitoring and measurement is a main input to check the level of achievement of the Safety Management System versus safety objectives and to continuously improve the Safety Management System. The means for data acquisition should be identified and used by safety assurance. This can rely on already implemented means, such as the collection system used for Continued Airworthiness when mandated by the applicable regulations, or the monitoring of the organization operations for malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes that could result in unacceptable aviation safety risk. The data acquisition process should include data collected in the context of the monitoring of suppliers. For data acquisition, the following should be established: •Interfaces with the operators of the products and services of the organization. Interfaces with customers and suppliers, in particular to encourage the exchange of safety data. Interfaces with Authorities. Channels to collect internal information. Data can be: •Quantitative: Used to identify and provide a clearer picture of the ‘area’ being measured. Statistical measures are generally used for this effort. Qualitative: Data sources such as employee safety reports and in-depth causal analyses in accident reports are generally qualitative. This approach is valuable for hazard identification. Examples of data related to products: Number of events reported to the organization (from internal or external sources or both). •Number of occurrences reported to Authorities. Number of recurrent occurrences. Number of quality escapes on products, rated for criticality with regards to safety. Number of Foreign Object Damage (FOD) (e.g., material left in aircraft, engine, debris falling into open systems). • Number of incorrect or incomplete data within the instructions for continued airworthiness •Number of installation errors (e.g., equipment/part not installed, wrong orientation, incomplete installation). •Number servicing errors (e.g., not enough/too much fluid, access not closed, system/equipment not deactivated/reactivated). • Number of current Airworthiness Directives (AD) affecting the Organization’s product(s). •Number of Service Bulletins issued to achieve safety objectives defined for the products. •Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF). • Mean Time Between Unscheduled Removals (MTBUR). Examples of data related to the organization’s performance: •Status of ongoing initiatives contributing to safety objectives. •Status of risk mitigation actions. •Attendance at Safety Management System reviews. •Number of employees trained to safety topics. •Limitations from Authorities due to suspension or revocation of privilege/delegation). •Level of Involvement (LOI) of the Aviation Authority in the product certification (i.e., level of involvement related to the criticality of the new design and the performance of the design organization). •On-time response to safety related findings (e.g., internal audits; Authority’s audits). •Resources or competences management (e.g. key safety positions fulfilment such as safety management staff, certification staff in design or certifying staff in manufacturing or maintenance or both). • Factors related to the operational environment (e.g., ambient noise and vibration, temperature, lighting and the availability of protective equipment and clothing). • Lead time to issue mitigations or corrective measures in the Continued Airworthiness process or both. • Identified deficiencies in interface management. The aforementioned examples of collected data need to be processed or analyzed or both to set up relevant performance indicators as further detailed in section 6.3.1 Means of Compliance. The organization is required to collect data to support Safety Assurance. This might include, but is not limited to: automatic data reports, a mandatory event reporting system, systematic reviews or audits, or a voluntary employee reporting system or both, based on the Just Culture policy (refer to section 6.1.1.1 d and 6.2.1) and may be one of the means for acquiring data. All employees should be aware of the systems being used that are appropriate to their duties and where systems are available to enable the anonymous reporting of data (e.g., potential hazards and, if available, proposed solutions or safety improvements). In Europe, regulation (EU) No 376/2014 and associated guidance material provide details on the requirements related to voluntary employee reporting. 6.3.1 Safety Performance Monitoring and Measurement international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 3.1 Safety performance monitoring and measurement 3.1.1 The service provider shall develop and maintain the means to verify the safety performance of the organization and to validate the effectiveness of safety risk controls. Note: An internal audit process is one means to monitor compliance with safety regulations, the foundation upon which Safety Management System is built, and assess the effectiveness of these safety risk controls and the Safety Management System. Guidance on the scope of the internal audit process is contained in the Safety Management Manual (SMM) (Doc 9859). 3.1.2 The service provider’s safety performance shall be verified in reference to the safety performance indicators and safety performance targets of the Safety Management System in support of the organization’s safety objectives. Understanding The intent of an organization's Safety Management System is to achieve a successful Safety Risk Management. The Safety Risk Management process cannot be open-loop; thus, the Safety Assurance process should include means to monitor the performance of the Safety Management System, both in its functionality (Safety Management System operation) and in the effectiveness of the risk controls it produces (product safety). The organization is expected to perform an evaluation on how the Safety Management System is performing versus the organization’s safety objectives. The organization is expected to develop and maintain appropriate safety-related performance indicators. Means of Compliance The acquisition of data to be analyzed, as outlined in section 6.3, is performed according to previously established criteria which should be commensurate to the products’ diversity, complexity and criticality and to the organization itself. Regardless of which part of the organization is in charge of processing the collected data and implementing corrective actions, the data should be reported to the Safety Assurance function for the purpose of assessing the safety performance. Safety Performance Indicators (SPIs) should be simple, measurable, and reliable. They should include a mix of outcome indicators (e.g., accident rates) and process indicators (e.g., validation of safety-critical processes, record keeping). Safety performance assessment results can be used in two ways: to measure the effectiveness of risk mitigation measures by comparing SPIs to targets set in the safety objectives statement. - To identify potentially new hazards resulting from ineffective mitigations, to be studied in Safety Risk Management. How to measure safety? Safety Management System deals with aviation safety (i.e., deaths or injuries to passengers and crew on board, or deaths and injuries to people overflown or on the ground around the aircraft, or damage to aircraft and environment). Due to multiple contributors in the chain of circumstances leading to a safety event (e.g., aircraft manufacturer, operators, maintenance organizations, training organization with each one playing their part in safety), data collected for processing by the organization's Safety Management System is by nature partial and limited. Safety performance monitoring may need to consider potential precursors and weak signals (events which could potentially lead to accidents/incidents but didn’t) due to factors such as the declining number of accidents and small number of actual recognizable safety events being offset by the continuing growth in the number of flights. How to build indicators Safety Risk Management is the Safety Management System tool for studying potential events. Safety Risk Management produces an assessment of criticality relative to the safety of the events being processed. An SPI cannot be a simple risk achievement worth number of incidents being processed, it should include an assessment aspect reflecting the criticality. The results may be expressed in ratios, averages, rates or trends. One recognized issue is the time needed for observing the effects of mitigating measures, again due to the low probabilities of actual events occurring. An indicator will need to reflect a rather long observation time (e.g. rolling averages over five years), which makes it inconvenient for short term management of the Safety Management System. Typical Safety Performance Indicators Each organization will need to define the category of events to be considered for data collection and analysis and the criteria for assessment, depending on its own activity (e.g., in-service events on aircraft/equipment for design organizations or quality escapes for manufacturing or maintenance organizations). It may be useful to monitor some SPIs against the number of movements (e.g., flights, flight hours, flight cycles). Accidents and Incidents The number of actual accidents and serious incidents constitute a basic safety indicator. Rolling averages over 5 to 10 years are expected to be adequate. Monitoring the application (taking into account acceptable reaction times relative to criticality) of relevant safety recommendations from national safety investigation bodies may also constitute a safety indicator (e.g., implementation time, adherence to plan) It may also be of interest to acquire industry wide statistics to compare the organization's operation with similar companies conducting the same types of activities. Fleet Events The term “Fleet Events” is used to describe what is reported from the operation of aircraft (or products present on these aircraft) of interest to the organization. Continued Airworthiness activities for Type Certificate Holders (TCH) fall into this category. The Safety Management System’s Safety Risk Management process should classify the criticality of events. Each organization may set up categories (based on technical, organizational or criticality parameters or both) and link event data to one or several categories. Ratios of number of events (by category) to flight activity (e.g., flight hours, flight cycles) may produce SPI. Trends may be established for each category and are expected to show improvements. Organizations should identify conditions (e.g. new aircraft types or equipment or both entering into service) which could adversely impact the observed trends while not constituting an actual degradation. The time needed to process an event (possibly with thresholds) may constitute an indicator, but is more suitable as an Safety Management System organization operation indicator. Climate of Safety Management System A qualitative assessment by people with sound experience in the organization’s Safety Management System management may be considered as a valid SPI (e.g., for an assessment of organization’s safety culture implementation level). Voluntary Reporting Voluntary reporting may identify opportunities for improvement, as well as being an indicator of a good safety culture. Encouraging staff to report every perceived hazard allows the organization to deal with identified issues (“if it is not reported it cannot get fixed”). Multiple voluntary reports are not necessarily a sign of a poorly functioning organization but rather a sign of a mature safety culture. The number of voluntary reports may be used as an SPI. Typical Safety Management System operations indicators The monitoring of the operational performance of the Safety Management System (Safety Management System operation) may require an adaptation of the indicators to the actual implementation state of the Safety Management System. Indicators may also be tailored to the specific environment of the organization. During the Safety Management System implementation phases (see chapter 8 “Safety Management System Implementation Plan”); indicators may be specific to measure the progress of the ramp up of Safety Management System activities. Examples of such indicators are: Key safety personal nomination status. Deployment and communication of policy and objectives: How many people (percentage) of the organization have been reached? How many people are trained on Safety Management System? How many documents for the Safety Management System have been prepared? Availability and maturity of IT tools needed for Safety Management System (e.g., computers and servers). Generally, the quantitative and qualitative requirements on the aforementioned examples should be included in the implementation plan to allow regular measurement and statusing of achievements on the implementation roadmap. Having reached a certain maturity of the Safety Management System, the acquired Safety Management System data and safety data may provide evidence about the operations of the Safety Management System. The data can be evaluated with statistical methods showing ratios, averages, rates or trends. Examples of such additional indicators are: A positive trend (decrease) in the number of events in the fleet or with the products over a reasonable period (the period should be related to the amount of events in order to achieve statistical significance). A positive trend (increase) in the number of voluntary reports in the organization (this will show adherence to Safety Management System principles). The processing time of incidents or mitigation actions or both (this could be split into the definitions/investigations phase and the actual implementation phase of related actions). The number of confirmed hazards input to the Safety Risk Management. The above indicators reflect the maturity of the Safety Management System and could be combined into an Safety Management System Maturity Matrix to summarize and map the operational performance, and then used for communication (see Appendix 2 “Example of Safety Management System Maturity Assessment Method”). Need for additional measurement Auditing and other investigative means, either internal or external, contribute to the monitoring of the safety performance, adequacy and compliance of processes and procedures to ensure they are being followed and properly executed. Monitoring Safety Management System operations is a useful complementary technique for day-to-day safety assessment, considering that a well-performing system will produce consistent results. Internal and external audits contribute to the validation of the assessment processes (and possibly the data collection). These audits are expected to go beyond compliance and to address effectiveness. These audits are not tools for establishing safety indicators, but are expected to generate "Safety Management System data" for understanding and assessing the system operations. As one of the monitoring means, audits could cover topics related to the: •Organization (including discharge of responsibilities, knowledge resource management, documentation, means and tools) and the deployment and maturity of the safety culture. SPI, representing the effectiveness of the risk mitigations and controls in the context of the Safety Risk Management. Effectiveness of the operational processes, such as the: ü Design and development process (including certification). ü Manufacturing process. ü Maintenance and repair process. ü Continued airworthiness process (e.g., product malfunction, failure or defect collectin or both, reporting, analysis or correction or both). When the organization holds an organization approval, such audits should be coordinated and accounted by the compliance monitoring function required by such approval. In non-approved organizations, the audits should be performed in the context of the organization management system with necessary adaptations of the audit program. How to communicate Safety Performance measurement A safety performance dashboard may be used to show the measured safety performance of the organization. The safety performance dashboard could contain targets, indicators, qualitative assessments or trends for both the product safety performance and the Safety Management System organization’s operational performance. The content and frequency of updates of the dashboard should be adapted to the maturity of the organization’s safety culture, to the safety performance results and to the complexity of the organization (see example of safety performance dashboard template within Appendix 3 “Example of Safety Management System Manual/Documentation”). The performance indicators are intended to measure the progress against the safety objectives defined by the organization. They should be subject to recurrent reviews to ensure their continued relevance. 6.3.2 The Management of Change international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 3.2 The management of change The service provider shall develop and maintain a process to identify changes which may affect the level of safety risk associated with its aviation products or services and to identify and manage the safety risks that may arise from those changes. Understanding Aviation organizations experience changes due to expansion or contraction as well as modifications to existing management systems which may affect the level of safety risk associated with its products or services. Hazards may inadvertently be introduced whenever change occurs.In addition, change may affect the effectiveness of existing safety risk controls. If an organization elects to use new or unestablished methods and processes, or to substantively revise existing ones, it should develop and use hazard identification processes to identify new or existing conditions that could foreseeably lead to unacceptable risk. It is neither possible nor desirable to implement a safety risk assessment process for all changes to the system. Only changes that potentially have a substantive impact on safety are subject to the Safety Risk Management process. The safety performance assessment includes the evaluation of significant changes. The management of safety risks resulting from changes should consider the following: • Criticality of systems and activities, including impact on external organizations. • Stability of systems and operational environments. • Past performance (What data and information is available that can be used to help in the analysis of the change?). Note: Refer to international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual §2.8.2 for additional details. Note: Consideration should be given not only to the risks associated with the change but also the temporary transitional risks when implementing the change. Note: “change” in the context of international civil aviation organization Annex 19 should be understood as a change to the system (e.g. organization, responsibilities, processes)and its associated operating environment and not directly to the product. Changes to the product are already controlled via other regulatory requirements (e.g. Part 21), including acceptance of such changes by certificate/approval holders when initiated by suppliers. Means of Compliance Even though each organization is unique, a number of features of the operational environment are common or similar among organizations. Thus, there are typical changes that could have a potentially substantive impact on safety management. An organization’s description is necessary to determine the scope of Safety Management System applicability, and the changes to which it could be subjected. Examples of typical changes include: Changes to the organization: Change in ownership. Relocation. Opening a new facility. Change in the scope of work. Introduction of a new technology (e.g., machine, inspection). Change in the organization (work sharing either internally between facilities or externally with partners/suppliers). Change in the parts of the organization that contribute directly to airworthiness or conformity. Change to the quality assurance or independent monitoring principles. Change of supplier(s). Changes to responsibilities: • Change of the Safety Accountable Manager and/or associated reporting lines. • Change of head of the organization (Accountable Manager). • Change of responsibilities affecting airworthiness and/or continued airworthiness. Changes to the principles of procedures related to: • Type certification. • Classification of changes and repairs as major or minor. • The approval of changes and repairs. • The approval of minor changes to the Aircraft Flight Manual (AFM). • Continued airworthiness. • Configuration control. • Quality management system. • The acceptance of tasks undertaken by partners or suppliers. • Substantive new manufacturing processes. • Manufacturing planning. • New or modified privileges for approved organizations. Changes to resources: • Substantial reduction in the number, qualifications and/or experience of staff. • Substantial increase in the number of staff. Changes in the intended use of the product (e.g., where new usage of the product is out of the qualified/certified design limitations). Approved organizations should consider significant changes as defined within the applicable regulation. Management of change could rely on the support from tools or methods (e.g. 8D, PPS, 5M, PFMEA) documented within some Industry standards. Availability of subject matter experts: It is important that key stakeholders are available and involved in the management of changes. This may include individuals from external organizations. 6.3.3 Continuous Improvement of the Safety Management System international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 3.3 Continuous improvement of the Safety Management System The service provider shall monitor and assess its Safety Management System processes to maintain or continuously improve the overall effectiveness of the Safety Management System. Understanding Safety Management System continuous improvement is a gradual and continual process that focuses on increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of an organization to fulfill its safety policy and objectives. Continuous improvement should enhance performance with action plans that are based on safety performance monitoring and measurement (refer to section 6.3.1). Means of Compliance The organization should consider the results of the safety performance measurements when defining continuous improvement actions for the Safety Management System. Based on the safety data collected in accordance with section 6.3, the organization should ensure: • Analysis of data at the organizational level is done to establish an action plan, with the stakeholders in charge of the actions' implementation. The action plan should address the root causes of the failures or malfunctions at the system level where safety performance has not reached the expected level. • Improvement actions are implemented. • Best practices and lessons learned are considered to improve the Safety Management System. Furthermore, these best practices should be disseminated across the organization through safety promotion activities (refer to section 6.4). In the context of continuous improvement, Safety Management System reviews with members of the organization’s management (as defined in section 6.1.1.1) should be organized with a frequency and format commensurate to the level of risks and the complexity of the organization. The outcomes of the Safety Management System review should be provided as inputs to the Safety Risk Management. Note: Safety Management System review can be part of a "management review” as defined in management system standards. Depending on the organization, specific Safety Management System review could be implemented as an input to an upper-level management review. 6.4 Safety Promotion Safety promotion starts with the strategy to develop a safety culture within the organization. Safety culture enables continuous improvement in safety performance. A safety promotion strategy should address the training, education and communication of safety information to support the implementation and operation of the Safety Management System. 6.4.1 Training and Education international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 4.1 Training and education 4.1.1 The service provider shall develop and maintain a safety training programme that ensures that personnel are trained and competent to perform their Safety Management System duties. 4.1.2 The scope of the safety training programme shall be appropriate to each individual’s involvement in the Safety Management System. Understanding The purpose of training is to acquire a proficiency level in targeted skills and competencies. The organization should define and maintain a safety training program. Safety training should be tailored to the organization’s employees, as appropriate for the competencies required by each job function. The organization should identify the population targeted for safety training. This includes employees whose activities may impact product or service safety in addition to those in charge of the Safety Management System. Role-based safety training should ensure that employees: • Are competent to perform their duties and responsibilities relevant to the operation and performance of the Safety Management System. • Understand how their activity could impact safety. • Know what means, tools and resources are available for Safety Management System operation. Means of Compliance The organization should define a safety training program to meet the safety policy objectives. This program should cover at a minimum, the scope, content, methods of delivery (e.g., classroom training, e-learning, notifications, on the job training) and frequency of training that best meet the organization’s needs considering the size, scope, required competencies, and complexity of the organization. The safety training program should be periodically reviewed to ensure it meets the objectives. The training should be specific to the organization’s Safety Management System and operations and should be delivered in accordance with competency needs. At a minimum, safety training should provide personnel with the knowledge required to report information that could lead to safety issues and an understanding of their reporting responsibility. The organization should maintain a record of all safety training provided to each individual subject to the training program. Such records should be retained according to the organization’s data retention policy and applicable regulatory requirements. 6.4.2 Safety Communication international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 4.2 Safety communication The service provider shall develop and maintain a formal means for safety communication that: a) ensures personnel are aware of the Safety Management System to a degree commensurate with their positions; b) conveys safety-critical information; c) explains why particular actions are taken to improve safety; and d) explains why safety procedures are introduced or changed. Understanding The organization should establish communication channels for safety matters that ensure that all relevant personnel are aware of the safety policies, processes, and tools. Communication with personnel also should provide relevant up-to-date information about safety objectives, safety management activities and safety critical information. The content of the communication and the way in which the information is delivered should be adjusted to cover the targeted population of the organization. Means of Compliance Communication is essential to build a positive safety culture through hazard reporting or sharing of safety information. In particular, the organization should communicate its safety objectives and the status of their achievement. Communication about new or revised documented information related to safety should ensure a proper dissemination and better understanding within the organization. In addition “Lesson Learned” on events (including incidents and accidents) and associated recommendations that are related to the organization’s products or services should also be communicated In order to improve the Safety Management System. Effective communication involves adjusting the content of the communication and the way in which the information is delivered to match the target employee’s role in the organization. The communication should be simple and concise so that it is easily understood and taken into account. The organization may extend safety communication, as appropriate, to external key stakeholders (e.g., customers, suppliers). The communication of safety information, including safety policy and objectives can be delivered as: • Text (e.g., newsletter, email). • Visual media (e.g. posters, short videos). • Crew or team briefings. • Intranet websites. • Other means as appropriate depending on the size and complexity of the organization. Safety communications may be retained as part of Safety Management System data. 7. INTERFACES BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS This chapter addresses the interfaces between organizations as mentioned in Annex 19 Appendix 2 international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Second Edition (July 2016) - Appendix 2 Note 2: The service provider’s interfaces with other organizations can make a significant contribution to the safety of its products or services. Guidance on interface management as it relates to Safety Management System is provided in the Safety Management Manual (SMM) (Doc 9859). 7.1 Interface principles In the context of an Safety Management System, interface management should encompass the four components (safety policy and objectives, Safety Risk Management, Safety Assurance and safety promotion). The interfaces between organizations can be expressed: Internally within one company/group/legal entity: Each organization holding its own Safety Management System (e.g., Safety Management System in design organization, Safety Management System in manufacturing organization). Each organization holding its own Safety Management System supported by a Corporate Safety Management System approach (refer to §7.2). One single corporate Safety Management System across multiple organizations (e.g., Safety Management System covering both design and manufacturing organizations with a single accountable executive). Externally with separate companies/legal entities: Having implemented an Safety Management System (e.g., operators, manufacturing organization, maintenance organization). Not having implemented an Safety Management System (e.g., engineering services suppliers, manufacturing suppliers). Note: The system description of an organization with an Safety Management System implemented should capture the interfaces with other organizations to ensure the flow down of requirements to external providers. The interface with other organizations that have their own Safety Management System implemented also should be considered. Regardless, the system description should be adapted to the size of the organization. For instance, it is impossible to make a detailed system description that covers all Safety Management System interfaces for a large manufacturer dealing with hundreds of suppliers, customers, etc. Externally with Aviation Authorities (AAs): As required by applicable regulation. Taking into account that all data coming from Safety Risk Management and Safety Assurance are not necessarily subject to reporting to the AAs. Note: Authorities may receive from other channels (operators, other authorities, various entities under their jurisdiction) valuable information related to the safety of a product or they may have access to generic safety data (e.g. recommendations from official investigation bodies). These may be potential sources of information for the organization. Safety policies and objectives may be shared between interfacing organizations to ensure consistent Safety Management System approaches. Safety risks in one organization may impact other organizations through the potential consequences of the risks or the management of their mitigation. A good practice is to establish a reporting system about such risks between the interfacing organizations. Risks that are shared between interfacing organizations should be reported among those organizations and acknowledged by each organization based on an agreed risk assessment scheme. For organizations within one company, the risk and related information sharing and the common mitigation actions may be organized by means of a common risk management tool which could also provide the agreed risk assessment scheme. For external relations (e.g., suppliers), risks may be mitigated through agreed reporting, acknowledgement and management practices. Safety risks can result from interactions between organizations (e.g., due to gaps or overlap of interactions) or lack of interface management (e.g., absence of monitoring). Safety assurance activities should focus first on data exchanges necessary for continued airworthiness which are subject to regulatory requirements (e.g., Part 21, EU 376/2014). These exchanges are usually governed by contractual requirements. Safety performance could be accounted for during the assessment of suppliers (for initial qualification or continuous monitoring).Exchange and management of safety or Safety Management System data exceeding the needs for continued airworthiness should be agreed between organizations and documented. This should prevent excessive system interaction between organizations (e.g., an operator in the context of its own Safety Management System requesting to audit a TC holder’s Safety Management System). The level and details of data exchanges should be adapted and commensurate to the complexity and safety risks of the products, services and interfacing organizations. It also should be adapted to the maturity of each organization with regards to safety management. Safety promotion principles and priorities may be shared between interfacing organizations to ensure consistent Safety Management System approaches (e.g., regular sharing of safety policies, top safety objectives and risks, best practices). When applicable, maintenance organizations should define how their subcontractors working under their own Quality Management System will contribute to Safety Management System activities. The contractual obligations should be set-up and assessed to ensure full subcontractor agreement. An organization is not required to justify hazard identification and decide risk control actions beyond its obligationsin order to avoid interfering situations. Interface management between organizations is relevant to any management system (e.g., Safety Management System, Quality Management System, Environmental Management System, Design Assurance System). 7.2 Interface documentation When relevant, the interface between organizations for safety management should be documented and maintained. This documentation should consider the following objectives: • Support the understanding of the organization’s boundaries and their interactions. • Clarify how the organizations (with or without implemented Safety Management System) are interfacing. • Address the management of relevant safety issues/items. Examples of documentation for Safety Management System interface provisions (such provisions could be the subject of dedicated documents or part of a broader documentation suite): • Organization’s handbook or exposition. • Contract. • Organization interface document. • General policy statement. • Arrangement. • Quality assurance plan. • Common applicable procedures when different organizations are within the same company or group. This documentation can contain the following elements for the interfacing topics and activities: 7.3 Organization and responsibilities (e.g., rights and duties to report issues, defects or occurrences, accountabilities and ownership for hazard identification and risk control, clear identification of interfacing focal points). Processes and deliverables descriptions (directly or indirectly through cross-reference to procedures). Criteria for reporting safety issues, noncompliance findings, nonconformities and occurrences. These criteria should focus on early communication of safety occurrences and potential safety issues (e.g., changes to the design, manufacturing, maintenance or operation of a product, part or appliance), Agreed means for timely safety issue reporting between organizations. Periodic reviews of the interface. Corporate Safety Management System approach An organization may elect to set up a “corporate Safety Management System” when the company holds more than one Safety Management System (e.g., Safety Management System in a design organization and Safety Management System in a manufacturing organization). A corporate Safety Management System may help streamline the Safety Management System implementation by providing a consistent approach over some or all of the four Safety Management System components across the organizations. A corporate Safety Management System may ensure: •Safety policies and objectives have consistent definition, implementation and continuous improvement through the organizations. Safety risks are managed consistently across interfaced organizations (e.g., defining a common safety risk methodology, defining criteria of management of top safety risks). Safety assurance activities are managed consistently (e.g., monitoring trends, implementing investigations on systemic issues across the organizations, change management). Safety promotion defines and ensures shared principles, priorities, lessons learned and best practices between organizations (e.g., top safety objectives/risks) via corporate events and awareness/training sessions. A corporate Safety Management System manual could describe the overall and common organization’s Safety Management System implementation over the 4 components and 12 elements of the Safety Management System as defined per international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Appendix 2. A corporate Safety Management System is not compulsory and it will be necessary to show how each of the service provider activities (e.g., design, manufacturing or maintenance) meet the Safety Management System requirements. Organizations may have to account for the oversight of different service provider activities to different overseeing authorities. 8. Safety Management System IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 8.1 General The purpose of this chapter is to assist the organization with Safety Management System implementation. It describes the main principles to implement a robust Safety Management System, by means of an incremental (step-by-step or phased) approach covering the four Safety Management System components. The proposed phased approach recognizes that implementation of a fully mature Safety Management System is a multiyear process. The intent is to allow a smooth implementation of Safety Management System, taking into account the complexity of the organization and maturity of its management system while ensuring the implementation remains flexible. This guidance should help any approved or non-approved organization to implement an Safety Management System that is compliant with applicable Safety Management System regulation either on a mandatory or voluntary basis. An Safety Management System should cover the items described in chapter 6. The following international civil aviation organization and Aviation Authority guidance may assist when implementing an Safety Management System: international civil aviation organization Doc 9859 Safety Management Manual Chapter 5 Table 5.2. Safety Management International Collaboration Group guidance ‘Safety Management System for small organizations” appendix 1. Federal Aviation Administration Design and Manufacturing Safety Management System pilot project guide. Depending on the Safety Management System element, phases may not sequential but rather concurrent. Depending on the original maturity of the organization with regards to safety management (based on the gap analysis outputs), the Safety Management System full implementation may last several years. Means and tools to ease the enhancement of a safety culture have to be used continuously and from the very beginning of the implementation plan. Appendix 2 “Example of Safety Management System maturity assessment method” proposes some guidance for an organization to self-assess the maturity of its Safety Management System along its implementation process. 8.2 Implementation Plan The following three actions should be considered, prior to developing the implementation plan: 1. Identify the safety accountable manager (refer to section 6.1.2). Subject to variations in each organization, the safety accountable manager is expected to have: • Full authority for human resources and financial issues. • Direct responsibility for the conduct of the organization’s affairs. • Final responsibility for all safety issues. 2. Identify the person or the team in the organization responsible for developing the implementation plan. 3. Nominate the safety manager. The Safety Manager should deploy the Safety Management System implementation plan on behalf of the safety accountable manager in addition to his/her operational functions (refer to section 6.1.3). The development of the Safety Management System implementation plan could be considered as an improvement project of the organization management system. Project management methods/tools (e.g., Life Cycle Business Improvement Project - LBIP) could help the organization to frame and run Safety Management System implementation plan. Phase 1 – Gap analysis This phase is fundamental to define an efficient and effective Safety Management System implementation plan. As the first step of Phase 1, the perimeter of the Safety Management System (system description) needs to be clarified. Further to the review of the Safety Management System requirements applicable to the organization versus the existing management system, the gap analysis will help identify what is already in place within the organization and what is missing. Organizations granted approvals or delegations or both from their Aviation Authority (e.g., Design Organization Approval, Product Organization Approval, Approved Maintenance Organization/Maintenance Organization Approval, ODA) should find that a large part of the Safety Management System requirements are already fulfilled through the compliance with the organizational approval requirements. Phase 1 should be considered as completed when the gap analysis is achieved. From the outputs of the gap analysis and considering what is missing in its management system to fulfil the needs of Safety Management System, the organization should consider going through all or part of the following phases: • Phase 2 Definition, planning & deployment preparation. • Phase 3 Deployment. • Phase 4 Continuous improvement. Phase 2 – Definition, planning & preparation This phase should be considered as completed when the following items are accomplished: • Safety objectives defined and approved by the safety accountable manager. • Safety policy signed by the AM and communicated within the organization. • Safety Management System governance structure in place with safety responsibilities established. • Personnel who will support Safety Management System implementation plan deployment identified, nominated and aware on the Safety Management System basics and objectives. • Safety Management System implementation plan approved. The Safety Management System implementation plan should: • Address identified gaps resulting from phase 1, by defining actions and responsibilities. • Include timelines and milestones. • Address coordination with interfacing organizations as defined in chapter 7, where applicable. • Be approved by the Safety Accountable Manager. • Be reviewed regularly and updated as necessary. Phase 3 – Development and Deployment This phase should be considered as completed when all the actions defined in the implementation plan (Phase 2) are achieved and the deployed Safety Management System is demonstrated compliant to this standard. As part of the deployment, the following subjects should be defined, documented and operative. They can be considered in a sequence adapted to the organization priorities as defined in the implementation plan: • Data collection system, starting with the reporting mechanism (including data sources, methods and means for gathering and filtering, etc.). • Hazard identification process. • Safety risk assessment & mitigation processes: ü The organization will be, at least ready to perform safety analyses based on information obtained through the reporting system. ü Safety Risk Management training scheme. • Safety assurance: ü Safety performance monitoring and measurement. ü Changes management. • Safety promotion: ü Safety communication, taking into account that upper and middle management staff is the driving force of an effective Safety Management System. ü Awareness/ training scheme for all personnel as appropriate. • Safety Management System documentation. • Safety Management System readiness assessment: ü Deployed Safety Management System is assessed against the implementation plan. This assessment could be performed using assessment method as proposed in Appendix 2“Example of Safety Management System maturity assessment method”. ü As applicable, a declaration of compliance could be issued to support acceptance by Aviation Authority. Phase 4 – Continuous improvement With finalization of Phase 3 the organization should have all required Safety Management System components/elements operative. Implementing continuous improvement initiatives is key to manage new hazards or threats associated to the continuous evolutions of the global aviation system with the aim to maintain the highest level of aviation safety. Such initiatives should be subject to a continuous improvement action plan (refer to section 6.3.3 “Continuous improvement of the Safety Management System”). Appendix 1 - Best practices for Safety Risk Management (SRM) 1. Purpose The purpose of this appendix is to introduce some best practices for Safety Risk Management but is not to further detail the examples of methods, techniques and tools cross-referenced in Chapter 6 of this Standard, e.g. • Examples of risk assessment techniques (source international standard organization 31010): ü Brainstorming. ü Checklist. ü Root cause analysis. ü Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA). ü Fault tree analysis. ü Decision tree. ü Bow tie analysis. ü Monte Carlo simulation, ü Consequence/probability matrix. • Examples of risk analysis at product level (source ARP4761): ü Functional Hazard Assessment. ü Preliminary System Safety Assessment. ü System Safety Assessment. ü Dependence Diagrams. ü Markov Analysis. ü Zonal Safety Analysis. ü Common Cause Analysis. 2. Scope for Safety Risk Management (SRM) Safety Risk Management should cover the following areas: System Description - to establish the framework for hazard Identification. Hazard Identification - to identify hazards according to a method. Safety Risk identification - to identify safety risks associated to identified hazards. Safety Risk Analysis - to determine the severity and likelihood of a risk associated to identified hazard(s). Safety Risk Assessment - from the risk analysis outcomes, to determine if a risk is unacceptable according to defined criteria. Safety Risk Control - to eliminate, reduce or mitigate a safety risk through action(s) to be defined when the risk is unacceptable. Examples of situations where Safety Risk Management should be applied by different types of organizations: •Organizations not holding an approval or certificate. Non-approved organizations should apply safety risk management to the following: ü Implementation of new systems. ü Significant revision of existing systems. ü Development of operational procedures. ü Identification of hazards or ineffective risk controls through the safety assurance processes. Design Organization Approval organizations: ü Significant changes in design assurance system in accordance with 21.A.247. ü Identification of hazards or ineffective risk controls through the safety assurance processes. ü Product certification with typical hazardous areas (refer to 21.B.100, i.e. european union aviation safety agency LOI): The novel or unusual features of the certification project, including operational, organizational and knowledge management aspects. The criticality of the design or technology and the related safety and environmental risks, including those identified on similar designs. -The performance and experience of the design organization in the domain concerned. • ODA organizations: Cf. Aerospace Industries Association Standard National Aerospace Standard 9927, sections 1.3.3 & 2.9. • Product Organization Approval organizations: ü Significant changes in manufacturing organization in accordance with 21.A.147 should trigger Safety Risk Management (e.g. change in products, organization structure, facilities, personnel, documentation, processes, tools). ü Identification of hazards or ineffective risk controls through the safety assurance process. • Approved Maintenance Organization/MOA organizations: ü Significant changes in maintenance organization in accordance with 145.A.85 should trigger Safety Risk Management (e.g. change in products, organization structure, facilities, personnel, documentation, processes, tools), ü Identification of hazards or ineffective risk controls through the safety assurance process. 3. Best practices for hazard Identification Hazard identification enables identifying “safety issues” or “threats” (referred to as hazards) that require application of Safety Risk Management and Safety Assurance. This allows the organization to allocate safety management resources to sources of potential significant safety risk, and avoid devoting resources to lower or insignificant risk. N° N° Best practices for hazard identification 1 Avoid trying to identify every conceivable or theoretically possible hazard. This is neither possible nor desirable. Judgment is required to determine the adequate level of detail in hazard identification. Due diligence should be exercised in identifying significant and reasonably foreseeable hazards related to the organization's operations. 2 Focus on the areas having the greater potential to introduce hazards that may lead to unacceptable safety risk, e.g., • Accident scenarios (e.g., from investigations) if not yet covered by existing continued airworthiness process. • Human and organizational factors (e.g., activity which may lead to unacceptable risks and affect the safety of products or services). • Business decisions and processes changes (e.g., significant change in the principles of a processor in the organization structure or both). •Interface with other organizations (e.g., manufacturing subcontractor of critical parts).•Novelty, criticality or complexity or both in product design, manufacturing or maintenance (e.g., introduction of additive manufacturing, inspection of composite structure). 3 Identify hazards from review/analysis of available safety data, e.g., N° N° Best practices for hazard identification • Safety reports/publications (e.g., reports from ICAO, Authorities, operators, and associations). • Audit reports. • Safety surveys. • Investigations (e.g., e.g.in the frame of continued airworthiness). • Safety analysis in the frame of safety enhancement initiatives. • (Refer to the definition of safety data in chapter 4, “Terms & Definitions”). 4 Do not mix hazards with triggering/contributing factors to keep a reasonable number of confirmed hazards necessary to be considered for risk assessment based on the complexity of the organization and/or product. 5 Group hazards in categories, e.g., Systemic hazards: • Organizational: management, resources, documentation, procedures. • Human: limitations of the person which in the system has the potential for causing harm, fatigue, stress. Operational hazards: • Technical: design.• Product operation. Environmental hazards: • Regulation, finance & budget, facilities, climate change. 6 Do not mix hazard with its foreseeable consequences. A hazard is not subject to severity or likelihood classification, but its associated safety risk is. 7 Consider that, depending on their nature, categorization and identification scenario: •Not all identified hazards must result in Safety Management System action (i.e. safety risk analysis and risk control actions). Several hazards can result in combined Safety Management System actions (see Figure A-1 and Figure A-2). 8 Consider that several hazards are already subject to systematic risk assessment and risk mitigation in the frame of product certification or continued airworthiness or both and may not need further Safety Management System activities at product level, e.g.,:“Hazard” is considered in product design assessment through failure conditions for compliance demonstration with the type-certification basis.• “Hazard” identified in existing Continued Airworthiness process with risk assessment/corrective actions (e.g. AD) at product level. Nevertheless, systemic risk assessments can be relevant (e.g., about organization, design, manufacturing or maintenance processes, tools, and competencies). If other risk assessments are used, check (where applicable) that the resulting hazards, risks and severities identified by these methods are consistent with the existing levels retained during certification, and resolve discrepancies. 9 Consider identifying hazards in an incremental manner from initial Safety Management System implementation up to Safety Management System fully operative. 10 Consider reviewing hazards in a continuous improvement loop. 4. Safety Risk Assessment & Control Safety risk should be identified using the most appropriate methods, techniques, and/or tools as mentioned in Chapter 6 of this standard. When identified, safety risk should be analyzed to determine its severity and likelihood. Qualitative analysis and engineering judgment are acceptable when there is no or not enough quantitative data available. Safety risk assessment uses the outcomes of risk analysis to determine the acceptability of risk according to defined criteria. When a safety risk is unacceptable, safety risk control action(s) should be defined and implemented. N° N° Best practices for safety risk assessment & control 1 Risk analysis and risk assessment should only be carried out for confirmed hazards that need further Safety Management System actions (refer to paragraph 3 in this Appendix). 2 Unacceptable risk should be subject to risk control action(s) to eliminate, reduce, or mitigate the risk. 3 Risk control actions should be monitored with feedback at least to the following: • Relevant operational managers impacted by the safety risks. Relevant safety management staff to monitor the effectiveness of risk control. 4 Risk analysis in terms of severity and likelihood should be reviewed if ineffective risk control has been detected. 5 Risk assessment should be regularly reviewed to ensure that the identified risk control actions are still appropriate. 6 Risk control actions could be a combination of short-term actions and long-term actions: The long-term safety risk control actions may not be known until or can only be determined when the short-term risk control is implemented. One intermediate safety risk control action can be useful before a more severe risk occurs. 7 Safety risk acceptability criteria should be reviewed based on: Feedback from the risk control determination. Safety performance measurement and monitoring. 8 Evidence and rationale for decisions on safety risk assessment (risk level) and controls (actions) should be recorded. Appendix 2 – Example of Safety Management System Maturity Assessment Method 1. Background and Purpose This appendix provides guidance and proposes a method for the maturity assessment of Safety Management System during initial implementation and continuous improvement. It is to be used by the organization as a self-assessment but could be considered as well by Aviation Authorities to evaluate the organization’s Safety Management System maturity. Note: Within this method, the column “What to look for (examples of evidence)” is a simplified description of the means of compliance/evidence with Safety Management System requirements. The core text and other appendixes of this Standard remain the basis for assessment of Safety Management System maturity. This guidance: • It is based on the Safety Management System evaluation tool originally developed by the Safety Management International Collaboration Group. Relies on a set of criteria¹ and evidences to help determine the overall maturity of an Safety Management System with regard to the 12 elements of the Safety Management System Framework as captured through this Standard and resulting from international civil aviation organization Annex 19. Considers the Safety Management System maturity improvement journey from Present to Operating to Effective. ¹Note: Within this document, “criteria” means the checking points/questions recorded in the columns “Present”, “Operating,” and “Effective”. “What to look for” means the evidence. 2. Definitions Maturity levels The maturity levels can be defined as follows: Level: Present This level of maturity means there is evidence that the item (referred to in the “criteria”) is defined and documented. Note: When this level is achieved, the Safety Management System is considered suitable. Level: Operating This level of maturity means there is evidence that the item (referred to in the “criteria”) is implemented with outcomes/deliverables. Level: Effective This level of maturity means there is evidence that the item (referred to in the “criteria”) is effective and achieves the desired outcomes. Evidence: Documentation, reports, records of interviews and discussions. While completion of “Present” maturity level is based upon available procedural documentation, completion of “Operating” and “Effective” maturity levels is based upon the consistent application of documented processes to produce and assess facts, figures and records. 3. Using the Method This method can be used for the first time to complete the Gap analysis as mentioned in Chapter 8. This Gap analysis and the resulting implementation plan are the main inputs to the next maturity assessment(s) of the Safety Management System. The method can be used as is or can be customized by each organization depending on its size, structure and activities. For each Safety Management System element, a series of ‘criteria for compliance and performance’ is listed followed by evidence (i.e., ‘what to look for’). Each criterion should be reviewed to determine whether it is at the present, operating or effective maturity level so that the overall maturity of the Safety Management System element can be evaluated, taking into consideration the other inter-related elements (e.g., “The safety policy shall be communicated, with visible endorsement, throughout the organization”). This requirement can be declared at the operating level under the conditions that a safety accountable manager is nominated and briefed about Safety Management System and safety policy is defined and promoted. These aspects are subject to other items within this assessment tool (such as §1.2 “Safety accountabilities and responsibilities, §4.2 “Safety communication”). Once all criteria for each Safety Management System element have been assessed, an engineering judgment can be recorded in “summary comments” block, with regard to the overall level of maturity of such Safety Management System element. Reaching one maturity level for the overall Safety Management System does not mean that each Safety Management System element is at the same maturity level (e.g., some Safety Management System elements can be at the “Present” level, some others at the “Operating” level and a few at the “Effective” level. In this state, the overall Safety Management System maturity can be considered to be at the “Operating” level). A person using this method should be conversant in the following: • Safety Management Systems based on the international civil aviation organization Safety Management System Framework. • Management System evaluation principles and techniques. • Safety Risk Management and Safety Assurance principles. Note: Statements highlighted in grey color in the Table (2nd column) are not taken from international civil aviation organization Annex 19, but from other sources (e.g. EU 376/2014) which may be necessary for Safety Management System evaluation. These are areas that may be customized if the organization is not subject to the requirements of these other sources. 4. Safety Management System Journey For most organizations, Safety Management System implementation will take time. It can take several years to reach the “Effective” maturity level. Figure B-1 shows the different levels of Safety Management System maturity. Each organization can always strive toward excellence as part of their Safety Management System continuous improvement. This method can support the assessment of best practices toward excellence keeping in mind that the ultimate goal of Safety Management System is to proactively enhance safety beyond the minimum required for compliance with airworthiness rules. A: Start Safety Management System development. B: Safety Management System is documented and suitable. C: Safety Management System becomes effective, achieving the desired outcomes. Appendix 3 – Example of Safety Management System Manual/Documentation This appendix should be considered in conjunction with section 6.1.5 – Safety Management System Documentation. When Safety Management System documentation is subject to a standalone document (Safety Management System Manual) which would be usually the case for a small or medium organization, it could be structured as the example proposed below (acknowledging that each organization may adapt its documentation to suit their own needs). 0. Document purpose The manual describes how the Safety Management System (Safety Management System) is implemented within the organization to comply with external and internal Safety Management System requirements. 1. Document control Manual Preparation: The Safety Manager prepares this manual with the assistance of the impacted services. Approvals: The manual is approved by the Safety Manager and the Safety Accountable Manager. By signing, the Safety Accountable Manager validates the manual's compliance with all requirements and ensures the organization's alignment with its content. Manual changes: It is recommended that the manual is reviewed at a minimum once a year to remain up to date further to changes in requirements or in company Safety Management System. The Safety Manager is in charge of revising the manual accordingly. The change approval circuit is the same as that for the initial approval. Release, record and archiving: After approval, the manual is released to all staff covered by Safety Management System, and remains available while it is applicable. It is recorded within a secured file, and all versions are archived. 2. Safety Management System requirements The following Safety Management System requirements are applicable to the organization: Refer to all requirement documents and sections that require an Safety Management System or Safety Management System element(s) (from Authorities, customers, corporate and organization). 3. Scope and integration of the safety management system The following activities are covered by the organization Safety Management System: List organization activities that have an impact of the safety of the services or products supplied by the organization. The following functions are covered by the organization Safety Management System: List services, departments, directions that have an impact of the safety of the services or products supplied by the organization. The organization Safety Management System interface with the following external Safety Management System: List external Safety Management System (customers, suppliers, partners…) with reference to the interface documentation which describe Safety Management System interface activities (contract, specification, plan, interface document…). 4. Safety policy Safety is a top priority for the company. Our safety objective is that our operations do not induce aircraft accidents or serious incidents. All of us should be aware of the potential safety dangers associated to our activity. All means should be implemented to reach the highest possible safety level of the products or services we are providing. In this aspect, it is our individual responsibility to report voluntarily and without delay all information on events of a nature to affect safety of these products or services. In order to favour communication without fear, the company undertakes not to take any disciplinary measures against anyone who has spontaneously and without delay reported any breach of the rules and procedures that he or she has committed that could have an impact in terms of safety. The organization commits to investigate and take appropriate actions on any event reported internally. Whatever our function within the company, each of us must commit to this process of continuous research of the highest level of safety. Signed (insert name) (insert date) 5. Safety objectives Considering the safety policy as described in chapter 4 of the manual, the following safety objectives are targets that we should reach: List main objectives defined by the organization to improve the product or service safety 6. Safety accountabilities and key personnel Safety Management System accountability is assigned to …. Safety Management System management is assigned to …. Safety Management System reporting is achieved by …. 7. Hazard identification and risk assessment All safety events, issues, or hazards should be reported to (insert name or function) by e-mail (insert e-mail address), telephone (insert telephone number) or verbally. He or she documents all of them in the Hazard Log (reference log file) and assess to determine what the issue is, what could happen as a result, what actions need to be taken (if any) and by whom to manage the risk. This Hazard Log is reviewed and updated monthly and shared with the organization’s management. When an issue or failure is identified or detected, (insert name or function) documents a risk analysis based on the following risk assessment method in a timely manner (to be completed, Risk = criticality X occurrence likelihood, FMEA, PFMEA, ishikawa ladder …). When the safety risk is confirmed, the organization implements a resolution plan in proposing palliative/corrective solution(s) in a timely manner. 8. Emergency Response Plan and remedial actions Reminder for the Safety Management System Standard reader: As stated in this Safety Management System standard (section 1 §1.4 Coordination of emergency response planning) this Emergency Response Plan is not required but an Emergency Response Plan is considered as a good practice that could be implemented on voluntary basis in design, manufacturing and other organization that could use this standard. The following is an example that could be used and amended by the organization. In order to respond to an Emergency situation the organization had voluntarily put in place an Emergency Response Plan Team that is: (to be completed by the organization). In anticipation of such situation: the rules by which the organization enter in an emergency management are the following: (to be completed by the organization). In such situation the process to be applied is as follow: (to be completed by the organization) 1. Emergency Response Plan Team to meet in a short notice (place, means, response time, etc.). 2. Emergency Response Plan Team to evaluate the Emergency of the situation. 3. Define immediate actions: a. Considers a reinforcement of the Emergency Response Plan Team as appropriate. 4. Prepare communication (Customer, Authorities, Medias…) as appropriate: a. Designate the communication responsible for the organization. b. Define the rules for communications. 5. Prepare following short, mid, and long term plans, actions and means sized to the issue to recover normal situation. 9. Safety performance monitoring and measurement The safety performance measurement and monitoring will review how all safety events, issues, or hazards collected are managed. For this (insert name or function) defines the appropriate key safety indicators (e.g. risk resolution time, number of recommendation implemented, promotion actions performed, trainings returns, process or product change review …). Key safety parameter measurement and review are organized every six months (to be scaled according to the organization activities and product nature) 10. Management of changes Changes (on product, process or organization) are reviewed by (insert name or function) while keeping in mind the safety impact of the change. The Safety Risk Assessment (refer to §7) could be the appropriate tool to evaluate the impact of such change on safety. 11. Safety promotion, training and communication Safety and Safety Management System training or awareness is provided every two years to all stakeholders in safety management. Any safety critical information that needs to be distributed will be sent by e-mail to all our stakeholders and posted on the company display panels. All staff is expected to review the panels and read any new safety articles. These activities are managed by (insert name or function). 12. Continuous improvement and Safety Management System audit Each year, the Safety Accountable Manager and Safety Manager meet to review company Safety Management System performances. Due actions are implemented to ensure system continuous improvement. The Safety Management System is audited at least once every 3 years. The generic agenda of Safety Management System reviews covers: • Review of safety performance results (safety performance dashboard), as defined in § 3.1. • Main changes in the Safety Management System driven by internal or external requirements. • Status of the Safety Risk Management for identified top level risks. • Effectiveness of the safety risk controls. • New hazards and risks identified by the Safety Risk Management since last review. • Good practices identified and recorded. • Action plan for the improvement of the safety performance, including allocation of resources and identification of action leaders. • Review of policy and objectives; update as needed. 13. Safety Management System records management Records of all documents mentioned in this manual are retained by (insert name or function). Appendix 4 – Compliance with federal aviation administration 14 code of federal regulations Part 5 This appendix provides the additional federal aviation administration requirements to be met when using this Safety Management System Standard for demonstrating compliance with 14 code of federal regulations part 5. Although Chapter 6 of this standard provides a means of compliance with international civil aviation organization Annex 19 (second Edition) Appendix 2, to use it for voluntary compliance of design, manufacturing and maintenance organizations with 14 code of federal regulations part 5, the following specific requirements must be met: Describe the system to identify the scope of the Safety Management System as per 14 code of federal regulations part 5.51 (Safety Risk Management-Applicability) & 5.53 (Safety Risk Management-System analysis and hazard identification). Manage the Safety Management System records as per part 5.97 (Safety Management System documentation and Recordkeeping). Implement a Safety performance monitoring and measurement process as per 14 code of federal regulations parts 5.71 (Safety performance monitoring and measurement) and 5.73 (safety performance assessment). Appendix 6 – Acronyms AIA Aerospace Industries Association AIAB Associação das Indústrias Aeroespaciais do Brasil AIAC Aerospace Industries Association of Canada AMO Approved Maintenance Organization AO Approved Organization air operator certificate Air Operator Certificate ASD AeroSpace & Defence Industries Association of Europe ATM Air Traffic Management air traffic organization Approved Training Organization ATS Air Transport System BMS Business Management System civil aviation authority Civil Aviation Authority continuing airworthiness management organisation Continuing Airworthiness Management Organization CEO Chief Executive Officer DO Design Organization design organisation approval Design Organization Approval ERP Emergency Response Plan EU European Union federal aviation administration Federal Aviation Administration GAMA General Aviation Manufacturers Association human factors Human Factors Ho Head of international civil aviation organization International Civil Aviation Organization KPI Key Performance Indicator LOI Level of Involvement MO Maintenance Organization memorandum of agreement Maintenance Organization Approval MRO Maintenance and Repair Organization MTO Maintenance Training Organization N/A Not Applicable NAA National Aviation Authority NAS National Aerospace Standard NPA Notices of Proposed Amendment operational control center OCCurrence PO Production Organization POA Production Organization Approval quality management system Quality Management System RO Reported Occurrence SA Safety Assurance standard and recommended practices Standards And Recommended Practices (ICAO) SMART Specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, time bound safety management international collaborative group Safety Management International Collaboration Group SMM Safety Management Manual safety management system Safety Management System SOPs Standard Operating Procedures SPI Safety Performance Indicator safety risk management Safety Risk Management ToR Terms of Reference UE Unsafe/Unwanted Event WG Working Group