Title: SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PRACTICES FOR DESIGN AND MANUFACTURING STANDARD PRACTICE Author(s): CIVIL AVIATION REGULATORY & SAFETY COMMITTEE Category: Regulation, Standard Tags: Safety, Management, System, Regulation, Industry, Design PREFACE This National Aerospace Standard (NAS) is arranged in two main sections. Section I constitutes the standard for the voluntary implementation of a safety management system (SMS) by design and manufacturing (D&M) organizations. It sets forth introductory information, a discussion of the role of the system description in an SMS, a listing of 14 code of federal regulations part 5 short messaging service requirements along with comments about the context of D&M related to each requirement, and a hypothetical example of a possible short messaging service process scenario. Section I presents an acceptable, but not the only acceptable, means for a D&M organization to voluntarily implement short messaging service policies, processes, and procedures consistent with part 5. Section II provides supplemental information that may be useful as explanatory material to provide additional insight about short messaging service to a D&M organization while planning, implementing, and maintaining its short messaging service in accordance with Section I. The information in Section II does not constitute or impose additional short messaging service requirements. It does not add any requirement for compliance beyond the Section I standard. Reference to Sections I and II will enable a D&M organization, at its discretion, to use its existing processes, procedures, and systems to the maximum extent for voluntary implementation of short messaging service consistent with part 5. 1. SECTION I: short messaging service STANDARD 1.1 INTRODUCTION This NAS is intended to enable United States (US) aviation D&M organizations to voluntarily implement a Safety Management System (SMS) that is consistent with 14 code of federal regulations part 5, Safety Management Systems. In order for a voluntary short messaging service to be accepted by the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as consistent with part 5, the respective organization must demonstrate that the short messaging service satisfies the intent of part 5 in all important respects. When implemented in accordance with this standard, the resulting short messaging service may be eligible for acceptance by the FAA. At the time of writing of this NAS, D&M organizations are not required to comply with part 5. International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Annex 19, Safety Management, establishes standards and recommended practices (SARP) applicable to safety management functions related to, or in direct support of, the safe operation of aircraft. Annex 19 prescribes that each State shall require organizations under its authority responsible for the type, design, or manufacture of aircraft, engines, and propellers in accordance with Annex 8 to implement an SMS. Annex 19 further prescribes that the short messaging service of an organization responsible for the type design of aircraft, engines, and propellers shall be made acceptable to the State of Design, and the short messaging service of an organization responsible for the manufacture of aircraft, engines, and propellers shall be made acceptable to the State of Manufacture. The federal aviation administration hardware accomplishment summary determined that the US meets the intent of the international civil aviation organization State Safety Program requirements (see AVP300-15-U.S. State Safety Program (v1.0) – 2015, p. 2). Therefore, pursuant to international civil aviation organization Document 7300/9 Convention on International Civil Aviation, Article 37 Adoption of international standards and procedures, and Annex 19, Amendment 1, Chapter 4, paragraphs 4.1.6 and 4.1.7, an FAA-accepted voluntary short messaging service implemented by a US D&M organization is acceptable to other international civil aviation organization States. The federal aviation administration hardware accomplishment summary determined that 14 code of federal regulations part 5 is consistent with Annex 19. Therefore, while this NAS is directed to US D&M organizations, international D&M organizations may find this NAS useful for the implementation of an short messaging service acceptable to international regulators as being consistent with Annex 19. The use of the term “design and manufacturing” in this NAS is intended to be consistent with its usage in Annex 19 and in the preamble of 14 code of federal regulations part 5. The use of the word “manufacturing” is not intended to exclude any aspect of a production system, such as quality assurance. The term “certificate holder,” as used in this NAS, refers to a holder of, or applicant for, a type certificate (TC) or production certificate (PC) for aircraft, engines, or propellers. It does not, for the purpose of an FAA-acceptable SMS, refer to a holder of a supplemental type certificate, parts manufacturer approval, or technical standard order authorization, although such holders may voluntarily implement an short messaging service using this NAS. Throughout this NAS, the term “aviation safety” is used to refer to the context of short messaging service as “the safe operation of aircraft.” When the word “requirement” is used herein with reference to part 5, it is intended to refer to the need for consistency between an organization’s short messaging service and part 5. It is not intended to indicate any regulatory requirement of part 5 as being applicable to D&M organizations. The term “product” is used herein to refer to an organization’s output, that is, the thing(s) the organization produces, such as aircraft, engines, or propellers. This NAS does not specifically address parts, components, appliances, articles, etc., but for the purpose of short messaging service implementation, these items may be considered “products.” In addition, “product” includes documentation necessary for its operation and maintenance. Examples of such documentation include Instructions for Continued Airworthiness, maintenance manuals, airplane flight manuals, service bulletins or instructions, and revisions to such documentation. This NAS is intended to facilitate the implementation of a tailored, appropriate short messaging service by individual D&M organizations. Because each D&M organization is unique, there is no “one size fits all” method for short messaging service implementation. The federal aviation administration expects that each organization will implement an short messaging service that works for its unique situation. The federal aviation administration hardware accomplishment summary established via part 5 the fundamental requirements of an SMS, i.e., what the short messaging service must accomplish. Each D&M organization must define for itself how it intends to fulfill the fundamental requirements. To accomplish this, it is important that each organization seeking acceptance of its short messaging service prepare a system description that identifies its organizational structures, processes, and business arrangements that it considers important to the management of aviation safety. Based on the system description, the organization should identify or develop policy, processes, and procedures that establish its own safety management requirements consistent with part 5. Implementation of those policies, processes, and procedures with the concurrence of the federal aviation administration will constitute an acceptable SMS. An organization will normally need to have processes and/or procedures that are present, suitable, and operating to address all applicable sections of part 5 in order to obtain an federal aviation administration acceptance. However, because each organization hardware accomplishment summary unique circumstances, reasonableness is required when evaluating processes and procedures. For example, an organization may elect to develop a new process to address an short messaging service requirement. Prior to the implementation of the SMS, there may not have been an occasion to exercise the new process. For the purpose of federal aviation administration acceptance of the SMS, such a new process may be evaluated as “operating” if it is in place and ready to be exercised. 1.2 The Role of the System Description When considering a system description, it is important to understand what a “system” is in the context of SMS. A system is any of an organization’s products, people, processes, procedures, facilities, services, and other aspects (including external factors) that are related to and can affect the organization’s aviation safety activities. These systems should be considered for short messaging service purposes both as discrete sub-systems and in the aggregate for system-level safety management. These systems and sub-systems constitute the “operational procedures” referred to in 14 code of federal regulations 5.51(c) and the “operating environment” referred to in §5.53(b)(2). For D&M, the important systems include both those that could directly impact the aviation safety of a product and those that affect the ability or capacity of an organization to perform effective safety management. For many D&M organizations, such systems include the processes used to accomplish: Design and Certification Production Continued Airworthiness In practice for a type certificate or test case or personal computer holder, this understanding of a system results in an emphasis on compliance with airworthiness regulations (“compliance assurance”), compliance with quality regulations (“conformity assurance”), and continued operational safety (COS) (“safety assurance”) across the product life cycle phases of design and certification, production, and continued airworthiness. A D&M organization should remain mindful that hazards associated with the organization and its processes may be identified across those life cycle phases as well. Through the system description, the D&M organization controls the extent of the organization that is subject to regulator oversight. The extent of the organization encompassed by the system description should be related to the safe operation of aircraft. For most D&M organizations, that would include: Processes used to design and certify a safe and compliant product (compliance assurance) Processes used for the production of a safe and compliant product (conformity assurance), including supplier production Processes used to assure product continued operational safety (safety assurance) Figure 1 illustrates an example of how existing processes used by a type certificate or test case or personal computer holder (in this case, an engine manufacturer) might be identified and linked in a system description to show their relationship to the system’s operating environment, as discussed above. The defining characteristic of an short messaging service is that it accomplishes aviation safety decision-making. It is, therefore, necessary for an organization to define and understand the extent of its system(s) that can affect aviation safety. A system description serves to identify the features of the product, the organization, and the D&M processes that might be sources of aviation safety hazards and associated safety risks and, therefore, be appropriate for the application of safety risk management (SRM) and safety assurance (SA). Importantly, it enables the organization to identify features that are not appropriate for the application of safety risk management and SA. This allows the organization to allocate safety management resources to sources of potentially significant safety risk and avoid devoting resources to low or insignificant risk. Business processes that rtca document (“document order”) not affect aviation safety are not within the intent of part 5 and would not be included in the description of the system. The FAA's emphasis is on system-level safety management, i.e., that an organization is able to encompass relevant but disparate organizational processes to manage aviation safety. The use of a system description enables considerable flexibility for the D&M organization to deal with the great variety of business arrangements and interfaces that may be involved in the operating environment. The organization should assess its own arrangements and identify those that are related to and can affect the organization’s aviation safety activities and, therefore, are appropriate for inclusion in the system description. An example of such flexibility is how an organization might choose to address the qualifications of people having duties or responsibilities identified in the system description. An organization might choose to specify that a person must meet certain qualifications prior to assignment to such a position. Alternatively, an organization might choose to identify unique qualifications for the position and how a person would acquire those qualifications after being assigned to such a position. An organization might identify any of a number of other approaches to individual qualifications. The individuals considered part of the safety accountability and authority defined in § 5.23 should be clearly described in the organization’s system description. Another example is how an organization elects to manage supplier interfaces and supplier oversight. An aircraft manufacturer might rely on an engine manufacturer’s own short messaging service for safety management related to an engine, or it might negotiate safety management terms and conditions as part of supplier contractual arrangements or use another method. The emphasis of short messaging service requirements is on what must be accomplished, not on how it must be done. Implementation of short messaging service does not fundamentally require an organization to change its existing processes. short messaging service is not intended to be a set of processes used to ensure compliance with airworthiness and quality regulations; however, it is intended to assure the continuing effectiveness of those processes. These existing processes represent a set of baseline safety risk controls. In other words, these processes already contribute to managing aviation safety risks. These processes might include, for example, product design and certification, selection of location for production facilities, management of multiple TCs, 14 code of federal regulations 21.3 reporting, supplier surveillance, etc. There is no requirement to evaluate the safety performance of existing processes prior to including them in the system description. When an organization elects to make a substantive change to those processes, the changes should be viewed as potentially affecting its baseline risk assessment, and the decision-making process(es) used to arrive at those changes should include safety risk management applied to the changes. During the development of operational procedures or a new system, or when any new hazard or ineffective risk control is identified, safety risk management would also be applied. short messaging service serves as a means to ensure that decision-making processes are and remain effective in maintaining compliance, conformance, and safety assurance. Therefore, it is important that decision-making processes associated with compliance, conformity, and continued operational safety assurance be included in the system description. Another example of an existing organizational process is the holding of approval from the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Design Organization. Such an approval also constitutes a set of baseline safety risk controls. It is neither possible nor desirable to subject all changes of any process to SRM. Only changes that potentially have a substantive impact on aviation safety management should be included. Generally, those will be changes to the policy, processes, and procedures identified in the system description as being important to aviation safety. Even though each organization is unique in its business arrangements and processes, a number of features of the operational environment are common or similar among D&M organizations. Thus, there are typical events or situations, i.e., triggers, which should be considered potentially to have a substantive impact on aviation safety management. In most cases, an organization’s system description should include those common features and triggers. It should be noted that despite being common or typical, there is no requirement of part 5 that any particular feature or trigger must be included in the system description or be in place at the organization. However, if any are in place and the organization elects to include them in its system description, they would be encompassed by the SMS. Examples of common features and triggers include: • Changes to the organization Change in Ownership Relocation Opening a new production facility Change in the production organization, unless shown that the independent checking function of demonstration of conformity is not affected Change in the parts of the organization that contribute directly to airworthiness or conformity. Change to the independent monitoring (internal audit) principles. • Changes to responsibilities Change of head of the design or production organization Change of head of the airworthiness organization Change of head of the internal audit organization Change of responsibilities affecting airworthiness, quality, or continued operational safety Change in continued operational safety responsible organization or location • Changes to procedures related to Type certification Classification of changes and repairs as Major or Minor The treatment of major changes and major repairs The approval of the design of minor changes and minor repairs The issue of information and instructions under a privilege of the organization, e.g., organization designation authorization The approval of documentary changes to the airplane flight manual The approval of the design of major repairs o Continued airworthiness Configuration control Quality system, including the creation of a quality system The acceptance of design tasks undertaken by partners or design suppliers Substantive new manufacturing process Manufacturing planning, including the creation of new planning • Changes to resources Substantial reduction in the number, qualification, and/or experience of staff • Changes to organization privileges or limitations Scope of approval Categories of products Scope of privileges As an organization gains experience with its short messaging service implementation, it may elect to apply safety management processes beyond the boundaries of the system description. Except when indicated by safety risk management or SA processes, there is no requirement that the system description be revised or expanded to encompass such “beyond compliance” activities. There is no requirement that such activities be included, for example, in safety performance monitoring and measurement. Although the application of short messaging service processes beyond the system description is encouraged, it is not intended to necessarily expand requirements. 1.3 short messaging service Requirements in Part 5 Following are the part 5 requirements that form the basis for a D&M organization to devise the policies, processes, and procedures that constitute its own safety management requirements consistent with part 5. Each requirement is presented as a direct quote from part 5. Following each quote from part 5 are comments about the requirement in the context of D&M. Where appropriate, examples are offered for additional clarification. 1.3.1 Subpart A – General § 5.1 Applicability. (a) A certificate holder under part 119 of this chapter authorized to conduct operations in accordance with the requirements of part 121 of this chapter must have a Safety Management System that meets the requirements of this part and is acceptable to the Administrator by March 9, 2018. (b) A certificate holder must submit an implementation plan to the federal aviation administration Administrator for review no later than September 9, 2015. The implementation plan must be approved no later than March 9, 2016. (c) The implementation plan may include any of the certificate holder’s existing programs, policies, or procedures that it intends to use to meet the requirements of this part, including components of an existing SMS. Section 5.1(a) does not apply to the voluntary implementation of short messaging service at a D&M organization. The implementation plan submission and approval deadlines in section 5.1(b) also rtca document (“document order”) not apply to the voluntary implementation of short messaging service at a D&M organization. Nevertheless, it is important to prepare an implementation plan. It should incorporate or be based on a gap analysis of the organization’s existing policy, processes, and procedures compared to the short messaging service requirements. The gap analysis combined with the implementation plan will facilitate mutual understanding between the federal aviation administration and the organization about details related to acceptance of the short messaging service and facilitate allocation of resources by both the federal aviation administration and the organization. Examples of such details might include concurrence about whether existing organization processes satisfy short messaging service requirements and plans to address any needed revision of processes or the development of new processes. Thus, the implementation plan serves to establish a path to an acceptable short messaging service for that organization. This NAS does not prescribe any time period or deadline for initiating an implementation plan or achieving acceptance. An appropriate implementation schedule leading to acceptance should be coordinated between the federal aviation administration and the organization. § 5.3 General requirements. (a) Any certificate holder required to have a Safety Management System under this part must submit the Safety Management System to the Administrator for acceptance. The short messaging service must be appropriate to the size, scope, and complexity of the certificate holder’s operation and include at least the following components: (1) Safety policy in accordance with the requirements of subpart B of this part. (2) Safety risk management in accordance with the requirements of subpart C of this part. (3) Safety assurance in accordance with the requirements of subpart D of this part; and (4) Safety promotion in accordance with the requirements of subpart E of this part. (b) The Safety Management System must be maintained in accordance with the recordkeeping requirements in subpart F of this part. (c) The Safety Management System must ensure compliance with the relevant regulatory standards in chapter I of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The requirement that “The short messaging service must be appropriate to the size, scope, and complexity of the certificate holder’s operation” need not be itself complex. The four required short messaging service components (safety policy, SRM, SA, and safety promotion) are the same for all organizations, but discrete processes are likely to vary. For example, a safety reporting process at an organization with 10,000 employees would likely need a greater capability to receive and respond to reports than an organization with 100 employees. At the same time, both organizations might have existing reporting processes that could also accomplish safety reporting. An organization that designs and produces an extensive line of products may need to consider how to implement its short messaging service across those products, while an organization with a single product might not. Whatever the situation, the system description would identify the applicable products, processes, and procedures. The short messaging service functions rtca document (“document order”) not need to be extensive or complex to be effective, and existing processes and resources may be used to meet short messaging service requirements. Section 5.3(c) refers to the fact that short messaging service requirements rtca document (“document order”) not replace, and may not be substituted for, compliance with existing technical or performance standards, such as the airworthiness requirements of part 23 or part 25. An organization may not use any output of its short messaging service to allow or justify noncompliance with airworthiness or other requirements. short messaging service outputs may nevertheless form one part of a showing of equivalent level of safety or may be part of substantiation for other risk-based assessments. short messaging service processes may be used as an acceptable means of compliance with certain requirements, such as reporting pursuant to 14 code of federal regulations 21.3. At the same time, short messaging service requirements are not intended to duplicate any existing obligation of an approval or certificate holder. For example, part 5 does not require reporting of safety information to the FAA. Therefore, it does not duplicate reporting required pursuant to § 21.3, but neither does it relieve an organization from any requirement for such reports. This does not preclude the use of an short messaging service process to accomplish required reporting. An organization should ensure its short messaging service is not structured such that it conflicts with the organization’s ability to comply with other requirements. 1.3.2 Subpart B – Safety Policy § 5.21 Safety policy. (a) The certificate holder must have a safety policy that includes at least the following: (1) The safety objectives of the certificate holder. (2) A commitment of the certificate holder to fulfill the organization’s safety objectives. (3) A clear statement about the provision of the necessary resources for the implementation of the SMS. (4) A safety reporting policy that defines requirements for employee reporting of safety hazards or issues. (5) A policy that defines unacceptable behavior and conditions for disciplinary action. (6) An emergency response plan that provides for the safe transition from normal to emergency operations in accordance with the requirements of § 5.27. (b) The safety policy must be signed by the accountable executive described in § 5.25. (c) The safety policy must be documented and communicated throughout the certificate holder’s organization. d) The safety policy must be regularly reviewed by the accountable executive to ensure it remains relevant and appropriate to the certificate holder. The safety policy developed by an organization must be consistent with §5.21 except that emergency response planning pursuant to § 5.27 is not applicable for a D&M organization, and therefore organizations are not required to include such planning in their safety policy. The safety policy may be described at a high level and does not need to be a long or detailed document. For example, safety objectives (5.21(a)(1)) may be described in broad terms, with details and linkage to safety performance indicators appearing elsewhere. The organization must establish, document, implement, and maintain its policy, and the processes and procedures that stem from the policy, in a way that works for itself. Some D&M organizations have developed a safety policy that fits on a single page. An example of safety policy is provided in Appendix D. The requirement to sign the safety policy may be satisfied by an organization’s document control system. Often, such systems rtca document (“document order”) not involve a pen-and-ink signature on paper but use electronic signatures or a defined approval process that represents the accountable executive’s approval. § 5.23 Safety accountability and authority. (a) The certificate holder must define accountability for safety within the organization’s safety policy for the following individuals: (1) Accountable executive, as described in § 5.25. (2) All members of management in regard to developing, implementing, and maintaining short messaging service processes within their area of responsibility, including, but not limited to: (i) Hazard identification and safety risk assessment. (ii) Assuring the effectiveness of safety risk controls. (iii) Promoting safety as required in subpart E of this part. (iv) Advising the accountable executive on the performance of the short messaging service and on any need for improvement. (3) Employees relative to the certificate holder’s safety performance. (b) The certificate holder must identify the levels of management with the authority to make decisions regarding safety risk acceptance. “Accountability” refers to active management and line employee involvement, and action in managing and maintaining safety performance. A D&M organization defines accountability by ensuring each of its management and line employees is aware of their specific role within short messaging service and actively participates in carrying out their SMS-related duties. Organizations should exercise due diligence in considering which employees are included in safety accountability. Generally, all employees should be aware of the organization’s safety policy and how the confidential employee reporting system works. The organizational functions for which employees have safety accountabilities should be identified in the system description. § 5.25 Designation and responsibilities of required safety management personnel. (a) Designation of the accountable executive. The certificate holder must identify an accountable executive who, irrespective of other functions, satisfies the following: (1) Is the final authority over operations authorized to be conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate(s). (2) Controls the financial resources required for the operations to be conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate(s). (3) Controls the human resources required for the operations authorized to be conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate(s). (4) Retains ultimate responsibility for the safety performance of the operations conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate. (b) Responsibilities of the accountable executive. The accountable executive must accomplish the following: (1) Ensure that the short messaging service is properly implemented and performed in all areas of the certificate holder’s organization. (2) Develop and sign the safety policy of the certificate holder. (3) Communicate the safety policy throughout the certificate holder’s organization. (4) Regularly review the certificate holder’s safety policy to ensure it remains relevant and appropriate to the certificate holder. (5) Regularly review the safety performance of the certificate holder’s organization and direct actions necessary to address substandard safety performance in accordance with § 5.75. (c) Designation of management personnel. The accountable executive must designate sufficient management personnel who, on behalf of the accountable executive, are responsible for the following: (1) Coordinate implementation, maintenance, and integration of the short messaging service throughout the certificate holder’s organization. (2) Facilitate hazard identification and safety risk analysis. (3) Monitor the effectiveness of safety risk controls. ( 4) Ensure safety promotion throughout the certificate holder’s organization as required in subpart E of this part. (5) Regularly report to the accountable executive on the performance of the short messaging service and on any need for improvement. The organization must identify an existing person in the organization who holds the ultimate decision-making authority over the organization’s operations to be designated as the accountable executive. This person is accountable for planning, organizing, directing, and controlling the personnel, organizational structure, financial, and other resources across the organization necessary to ensure proper functioning of the SMS. Although it is not expected or required that the accountable executive personally or directly carry out the listed responsibilities, the accountabilities may not be delegated to others. For example, the accountable executive may rely on others to assemble data, perform analyses, and prepare briefings or reports needed to “regularly review the safety performance of the organization” (§5.25(b)(5)). However, accountability for participating in the review and “direct[ing] actions necessary to address substandard safety performance” cannot be delegated and remains individually with the accountable executive. Another important function of the accountable executive is to facilitate development and maintenance of a positive safety culture. As an example, setting expectations is a key aspect of a positive culture, and expectations should be set for the organization by the accountable executive. The actual title or position of the accountable executive may vary according to the business arrangements of the organization. For example, the chief executive officer of a large organization, of which the D&M organization is one of the multiple subsidiaries, may not be an appropriate and accountable executive for SMS. The accountable executive must ensure the provision of the necessary financial and human resources for the implementation and maintenance of the SMS. For example, the organization should ensure that enough personnel are available to provide support for essential short messaging service functions such as analysis, assistance to operational managers in meeting their safety management responsibilities, and safety advice or guidance to the accountable executive. The administration of short messaging service functions is at the discretion of the organization. Some organizations may choose to use their existing management personnel to fulfill these responsibilities. Some may distribute the responsibilities among multiple management personnel. Other organizations may organize a safety department with a number of persons or assign duties to existing personnel within each operational division. Regardless of the arrangement selected, the accountabilities and responsibilities must appear in short messaging service documentation, e.g., short messaging service policy, an short messaging service manual, or the system description. Nothing in this section is intended to add any requirement beyond any other section of part 5. For example, the requirements of § 5.25(c)(2) and (3) apply to the safety performance assessment required by § 5.73, and rtca document (“document order”) not create or imply any additional requirement for safety performance assessment. § 5.27 Coordination of emergency response planning. Where emergency response procedures are necessary, the certificate holder must develop and the accountable executive must approve as part of the safety policy, an emergency response plan that addresses at least the following: (a) Delegation of emergency authority throughout the certificate holder’s organization; (b) Assignment of employee responsibilities during the emergency; and (c) Coordination of the certificate holder’s emergency response plans with the emergency response plans of other organizations it must interface with during the provision of its services. Section 5.27 does not apply for voluntary implementation of short messaging service at a D&M organization. However, coordination of emergency response planning should not be confused with the potential requirement in some cases for a D&M organization to immediately exercise SRM. For example, an accident investigation finding or detection of a quality system escape might indicate a need to immediately perform safety risk management to determine appropriate safety risk control(s). A D&M organization’s safety risk management should include the capability for immediately exercising safety risk management when warranted. 1.3.3 Subpart C – Safety Risk Management § 5.51 Applicability. A certificate holder must apply safety risk management to the following: (a) Implementation of new systems. (b) Revision of existing systems. (c) Development of operational procedures. (d) Identification of hazards or ineffective risk controls through the safety assurance processes in subpart D of this part. To know when the safety risk management process may be required, it is important to know what a system is. Systems could be people, processes, procedures, facilities, services, and other support facets which are directly related to the organization’s aviation safety activities. For D&M, the important systems are those which could impact the aviation safety of a product. Typically, these D&M systems include the following:  Design and Certification  Production  Continued Airworthiness Under 5.51, the safety risk management process is triggered when D&M organizations implement new systems, revise existing systems, develop operational procedures, or identifying hazards or ineffective risk controls through the SA processes in subpart D. See Section 2, paragraph 2.9.1, for examples. § 5.53 System analysis and hazard identification. (a) When applying safety risk management, the certificate holder must analyze the systems identified in § 5.51. Those system analyses must be used to identify hazards under paragraph (c) of this section, and in developing and implementing risk controls related to the system under § 5.55(c). (b) In conducting the system analysis, the following information must be considered: (1) Function and purpose of the system. (2) The system’s operating environment. (3) An outline of the system’s processes and procedures. (4) The personnel, equipment, and facilities necessary for the operation of the system. (c) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes to identify hazards within the context of the system analysis. Systems analysis is the primary means of proactively identifying and addressing potential problems before the new or revised systems or procedures are put into place. The system analysis should explain the functions and interactions among the hardware (including the product), software, people, and environment that make up the system in sufficient detail to identify hazards and perform risk analyses. The process is started by describing the system (this can be as simple as flowcharting the system or writing a short narrative). For the purpose of system analysis and hazard identification, the “system” is the same as identified in the short messaging service system description. It may be necessary to analyze the system as various combinations of subsystems, depending upon the lifecycle phase(s) under consideration. Section 5.53 requires D&M organizations to have a process to identify aviation safety hazards by describing and analyzing the systems identified in § 5.51. Section 5.53 does not replace or obviate any system safety assessments for product airworthiness compliance purposes. The system description and analysis provide a basis for understanding possible hazards related both to the product and the operating environment. Because statistical data for D&M systems in the operating environment (as opposed to a product) generally rtca document (“document order”) not exist, qualitative analysis is acceptable. There is no requirement that a single analysis be used, nor that a single analysis be applied both to the product and the operating environment. There is no prescribed level of complexity or comprehensiveness required of the analysis. Any analysis methodology that supports the identification of hazards and development and implementation of risk controls may be used. With regard to design and certification, hazards are the conditions that could foreseeably lead to a noncompliant product that, if not addressed, would rise to the level of unacceptable risk. If an organization elects to use new or unestablished methods and processes, or to substantively revise existing methods and processes, it should develop and use hazard identification processes to identify conditions that could foreseeably lead to a noncompliant product with unacceptable risk. For a manufacturing organization, hazards are the conditions that could foreseeably lead to a nonconforming product that, if not addressed, would rise to the level of unacceptable risk. If an organization elects to use new, unestablished, or substantively revised methods and processes, it should develop and use hazard identification processes to identify conditions that could foreseeably lead to a nonconforming product with unacceptable risk. For continued airworthiness, hazards are the conditions that could foreseeably lead to unacceptable safety risk in a product. D&M organizations should have established and documented methodologies and processes (such as a continued operational safety program) for monitoring reported in service events; in-service failures, malfunctions, or defects; quality escapes; flight test events; supplier notices of escapement; and noncompliance’s related to the product certificates or approvals they hold. Each of these events should be analyzed per 5.53 to identify aviation safety hazards. § 5.55 Safety risk assessment and control. (a) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes to analyze safety risk associated with the hazards identified in § 5.53(c). b) The certificate holder must define a process for conducting risk assessment that allows for the determination of acceptable safety risk. (c) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes to develop safety risk controls that are necessary as a result of the safety risk assessment process under paragraph (b) of this section. (d) The certificate holder must evaluate whether the risk will be acceptable with the proposed safety risk control applied, before the safety risk control is implemented. safety risk management requires the analysis of risk to determine the severity and likelihood associated with identified hazards. Various guidance is available for analyzing risk. An appropriate quantitative or qualitative method must be used. Safety risk must be assessed to determine its acceptability. During design and certification, compliance with existing certification procedural and airworthiness regulations defines an acceptable safety risk. During production, safety risk acceptability is defined by the part 21 requirements for a product to conform to its approved design and be in a condition for safe operation. In some situations, conditions such as assembly variations or a need to repair damaged parts or assemblies may arise during production. There may also be instances where a “disclosure” hardware accomplishment summary been identified. A manufacturing organization, in coordination with the design organization, may use approved processes that address these situations to ensure the product conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. These approved processes are an acceptable way to achieve acceptable safety risk. During the continued airworthiness phase, safety risk acceptability is defined by the continued airworthiness of products in service. Safety risk acceptability during the continued airworthiness phase should be based on consideration of the applicable airworthiness standards and ensuring that no unsafe condition exists. The existence of an unsafe condition related to a product constitutes unacceptable safety risk. The opportunity for a D&M organization to determine that safety risk related to a product is acceptable applies only to situations where no unsafe condition exists. For those situations, there is no specific level of safety risk that is required in order to be considered acceptable, but determination of product safety risk acceptability by a D&M organization may be more conservative than 14 code of federal regulations part 39. 1.3.4 Subpart D – Safety Assurance § 5.71 Safety performance monitoring and measurement. (a) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes and systems to acquire data with respect to its operations, products, and services to monitor the safety performance of the organization. These processes and systems must include, at a minimum, the following: (1) Monitoring of operational processes. (2) Monitoring of the operational environment to detect changes. (3) Auditing of operational processes and systems. (4) Evaluations of the short messaging service and operational processes and systems. (5) Investigations of incidents and accidents. (6) Investigations of reports regarding potential non-compliance with regulatory standards or other safety risk controls established by the certificate holder through the safety risk management process established in subpart B of this part. (7) A confidential employee reporting system in which employees can report hazards, issues, concerns, occurrences, incidents, as well as propose solutions and safety improvements. (b) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes that analyze the data acquired through the processes and systems identified under paragraph (a) of this section and any other relevant data with respect to its operations, products, and services. The organization should conduct on-going monitoring of its system as defined in the system description to acquire data needed to assess safety performance in accordance with §5.73. Audits should be conducted periodically to determine whether processes are operating, and to assess whether they are effective. Because of the manufacturer’s expertise in the building of the product, it may also be requested to support investigations of incidents and accidents. Organizations should have a process or system in place to support an incident or accident investigation, if requested by the national transportation safety board or other national agency. Any information from these investigations (within the limits of the investigation protocol) linked to the design or manufacture of the product should be evaluated by the safety risk management process to determine any applicable risk controls. The intent of confidential employee reporting is to ensure employees have a nonpunitive means to communicate aviation safety information to the SMS. The organization should ensure employees are aware of the confidential reporting system and are using it as appropriate. Safety risk management should be applied to appropriate aviation safety concerns submitted via the confidential employee reporting system. § 5.73 Safety performance assessment. (a) The certificate holder must conduct assessments of its safety performance against its safety objectives, which include reviews by the accountable executive, to (1) Ensure compliance with the safety risk controls established by the certificate holder. (2) Evaluate the performance of the SMS. (3) Evaluate the effectiveness of the safety risk controls established under § 5.55(c) and identify any ineffective controls. (4) Identify changes in the operational environment that may introduce new hazards. (5) Identify new hazards. (b) Upon completion of the assessment, if ineffective controls or new hazards are identified under paragraphs (a)(2) through (5) of this section, the certificate holder must use the safety risk management process described in Subpart C of this part. Safety performance measurement is an assessment of the organization’s capability to manage risk. It is a determination of the processes’ success in managing risk and the resulting effectiveness of the implemented risk controls from both a product and organizational perspective. The organization should assess the data collected under §5.71 against its safety objectives to evaluate its safety performance. The organization should consider safety lessons learned. Particular interest should be focused on the processes and procedures related to implementing safety lessons learned from subparts C and D into the design. For D&M organizations, safety performance assessment and identification of ineffective controls or new hazards is primarily performed as part of continued airworthiness. Section 5.73 requires an evaluation of how the product is performing in service against the organization’s safety objectives. The organization is expected to develop and maintain appropriate safety-related performance indicators. These indicators may be precursor indicators of incidents or accidents (such as high-speed rejected takeoffs or engine inflight shutdowns). It is not expected that there would be a safety performance indicator for every safety risk control, given that compliance with each airworthiness regulation is considered a risk control. The organization must evaluate substantive changes to its SA or continued operational safety processes to ensure the processes still perform their intended purpose (that is, assessing its products in-service data and performing safety risk management as appropriate when an ineffective control, new hazard, or potential hazard hardware accomplishment summary been identified). § 5.75 Continuous improvement. The certificate holder must establish and implement processes to correct safety performance deficiencies identified in the assessments conducted under § 5.73. The intent is to use the performance assessments from § 5.73 to identify where safety objectives are not being met and identify corrective action. “Deficiencies” refers to failure to achieve a safety objective, as indicated by the measurement of safety performance. Processes to correct such deficiencies must be established and implemented. 1.3.5 Subpart E-Safety Promotion § 5.91 Competencies and training. The certificate holder must provide training to each individual identified in § 5.23 to ensure the individuals attain and maintain the competencies necessary to perform their duties relevant to the operation and performance of the SMS. Training may be tailored to employees’ respective positions in the organization. An organization might elect not to provide short messaging service training to employees having no SMS-related accountabilities. It is important, however, that employees having responsibilities relevant to aviation safety, even if limited in scope, know how to report safety concerns and understand that it is their responsibility to rtca document (“document order”) so. The organization should develop the content, methods of delivery, and frequency of training that best meet its needs. Organizations may choose internal or external training. Regardless of the approach taken, the training must be specific to the organization’s short messaging service and operations. § 5.93 Safety communication. The certificate holder must develop and maintain means for communicating safety information that, at a minimum: (a) Ensures that employees are aware of the short messaging service policies, processes, and tools that are relevant to their responsibilities. (b) Conveys hazard information relevant to the employee’s responsibilities. (c) Explains why safety actions have been taken. (d) Explains why safety procedures are introduced or changed. Safety policy and information could be provided as text, visual media such as posters or short videos, oral crew or team briefings, intranet websites, or other means as appropriate depending on the size and complexity of the organization. Messages should be delivered using whichever media the organization wishes to use. 1.3.6Subpart F – short messaging service Documentation and Recordkeeping § 5.95 short messaging service documentation. The certificate holder must develop and maintain short messaging service documentation that describes the certificate holder’s: (a) Safety policy. (b) short messaging service processes and procedures. Documentation of an organization’s short messaging service policy, processes and procedures includes the steps involved, methods to be used, and associated criteria, objectives, expected outputs, and outcomes necessary to meet the requirements. The manner and format of documentation is at the discretion of the organization. The organization should have a means to maintain the documents dealing with these policies, processes, and procedures. § 5.97 short messaging service records. (a) The certificate holder must maintain records of outputs of safety risk management processes as described in subpart C of this part. Such records must be retained for as long as the control remains relevant to the operation. (b) The certificate holder must maintain records of outputs of safety assurance processes as described in subpart D of this part. Such records must be retained for a minimum of 5 years. (c) The certificate holder must maintain a record of all training provided under § 5.91 for each individual. Such records must be retained for as long as the individual is employed by the certificate holder. (d) The certificate holder must retain records of all communications provided under § 5.93 for a minimum of 24 consecutive calendar months. The requirement to maintain records of outputs, training, and communications does not in itself create any requirement to submit those records to the FAA. However, these records should be made available to the federal aviation administration for oversight activities. The requirements of this section are not intended to require an organization to retroactively maintain or recreate records of activity before its short messaging service implementation. The requirements related to short messaging service records apply beginning with short messaging service implementation. 1.4 A Hypothetical Example of short messaging service Processes In Action: Management Decision to Outsource Software Development ACME Aircraft Corporation hardware accomplishment summary always developed critical flight control software internally using rigorous processes that are compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. ACME recently won a new contract and wants to outsource software development since its engineering department is fully utilized in other projects. ACME’s short messaging service evaluated this change to their design system (which is part of ACME’s short messaging service system description and identified as important to the management of aviation safety) and determined that safety risk management is required per 5.51(b) since flight control software is safety critical and outsourcing software development is a change to ACME’s design processes. This change triggered the requirement per 5.53 to analyze their design system and identify safety hazards. ACME developed a system description that included their software design process and supplier selection procedures. Improperly functioning flight control software was identified as an aviation safety hazard that could lead to an accident. After analyzing the system, ACME identified the following hazards for outsourced software development: 1) Supplier selection procedures lack sufficient detail to ensure the supplier is capable of developing flight critical software 2) Software requirements flow down procedures are not sufficiently detailed to ensure proper understanding of design requirements 3) ACME does not have processes in place to provide oversight of software developed outside of the company ACME gathered a group of short messaging service and software development experts to analyze the risk posed by each hazard. Results from this assessment were plotted on the risk matrix in Figure 2. The matrix shown in Figure 2 is a hypothetical example of a matrix that might be used by a hypothetical organization. The terminology and risk levels are not intended to be considered mandatory or required by this NAS. Organizations should develop terminology and risk level characterizations appropriate for themselves. FIGURE 2 – ACME AIRCRAFT COMPANY short messaging service RISK MATRIX Hazard No. 1: Supplier selection procedures lack sufficient detail to ensure the supplier is capable of developing flight critical software. Risk Rating: Serious (Probability: Occasional, Severity: Critical) Hazard No. 2: Software requirements flow down procedures are not sufficiently detailed to ensure a proper understanding of design requirements. Risk Rating: Serious (Probability: Remote, Severity: Catastrophic) Hazard No. 3: ACME does not have processes in place to provide an oversight of software developed outside of the company. Risk Rating: Low (Probability: Improbable, Severity: Negligible) ACME’s short messaging service requires risk control implementation for serious and high risk levels. The short messaging service team developed the following risk controls: Risk Control No. 1: Update supplier selection procedures to include a capability assessment prior to issuing any external contracts for software development. Updated Risk Rating: Medium (Probability: Occasional, Severity: Critical) Risk Control No. 2: Review and update software requirements flow-down processes to ensure they function properly when working with external suppliers. Updated Risk Rating: Eliminated (Probability: Eliminated, Severity: Catastrophic) The updated risk ratings meet ACME’s short messaging service requirements for effective risk controls. With these risk controls in place, the safety risk management process was completed, and ACME went ahead with the outsourced software development project. 2. SECTION II: short messaging service IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS 2.1 The need for a NAS for Voluntary Implementation of an FAA-Accepted short messaging service International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Annex 19, Safety Management, establishes standards and recommended practices (SARP) applicable to safety management functions related to, or in direct support of, the safe operation of aircraft. Annex 19 prescribes that each State shall require organizations under its authority responsible for the type design or manufacture of aircraft in accordance with Annex 8 to implement an SMS. Annex 19 further prescribes that the short messaging service of an organization responsible for the type design of aircraft shall be made acceptable to the State of Design, and the short messaging service of an organization responsible for the manufacture of aircraft shall be made acceptable to the State of Manufacture. In the absence of a federal aviation administration requirement for US D&M compliance with part 5, there is potential for any international regulator seeking adherence to Annex 19 standard and recommended practices to demand, as a condition of aircraft operation, registration, or importation, that a US D&M organization provide evidence of an short messaging service that complies with the SARPs. This NAS provides practices that may be used by D&M organizations to develop a voluntary short messaging service that is consistent with part 5 and is therefore eligible for acceptance by the FAA. Acceptance by the FAA, documented in the form of a letter or other written substantiation, is intended to facilitate acceptance of the D&M organization’s short messaging service by international regulators pursuant to Annex 19. 2.2 Safety Culture and Safety Management One key aspect that is essential to safety performance is the culture of the organization. “Safety culture” is the term that we apply to those aspects of the organization’s culture that relate to safety performance. The concept of safety culture underlies safety management and is the basis for the short messaging service requirements of part 5. However, part 5 does not include any requirement to have, measure, or assess safety culture. It is not intended that any D&M organization be required to demonstrate a “positive” safety culture. Because the culture of an organization includes the deeply ingrained and automatic psychological and behavioral aspects of human performance, there is a strong correlation between safety culture and accident prevention. Therefore, safety culture and short messaging service are interdependent. Management’s constant attention, commitment, and visible leadership are essential to guiding an organization toward a positive safety performance. Cultures are the product of the values and actions of the organization’s leadership as well as the results of organizational learning. Cultures are not really “created” or “implemented;” they emerge over time and as a result of experience. Organizations cannot simply purchase a software program, produce a set of posters filled with buzzwords, require their people to attend an hour of slide presentations, and instantly install an effective SMS. As with the development of any skill, it takes time, practice, repetition, the appropriate attitude, a cohesive approach, and constant coaching from involved mentors. The learning and practicing of safety management skills, coaching by mentors, day-to-day exercise of short messaging service processes, and other discrete behaviors constitute “safety behaviors” that contribute to the development of the safety culture. It is for this reason that a management framework that facilitates decision-making and shapes the environment in which employees work is crucial to organizational performance in all aspects of the organization’s business, including safety. A safety culture matures as safety management skills are learned and practiced, and safety behaviors become second nature across the entire organization. The following have been found to be characteristics of organizations that consistently achieve safe results: Open Reporting. Policies and processes that foster open reporting while, at the same time, stressing the need for continuous diligence and professionalism. The organization should encourage disclosure of errors without fear of reprisal, yet it should also demand accountability on the part of employees and management alike. Just Culture. The organization should engage in the identification of systemic errors, implement preventative corrective action, and exhibit intolerance of undesirable behaviors such as recklessness or willful disregard for established procedures. This is often referred to as a “just culture.” Personnel Involvement. Involvement of line personnel and all levels of management in functions dealing with aviation safety, including the accountable executive, is critical to effective safety management throughout an organization. Use of Information. Effective use of all safety information assures informed management decision-making. Commitment to Risk Reduction. The organization expects direct management involvement in identifying hazards and managing risk. Vigilance. Processes that provide vigilance of ongoing operations and the environment to ensure the effectiveness of risk controls and awareness of emerging hazards. Flexibility. Using information effectively to adjust and change to reduce risk and a willingness to commit resources to making changes necessary to reduce risk. Learning. The organization learns from its own failures and from those of allied and similar businesses. The organization actually uses acquired data to feed analysis processes, the results of which yield information that can be acted upon to improve safety. Management leadership should demonstrate their visible commitment to and involvement in safe operation performing their daily work. short messaging service processes rtca document (“document order”) not have to be expensive or sophisticated; however, active personal involvement of operational leaders is essential. Safety management must be accomplished by those managers who “own” the processes in which risk resides. Safety cultures also cannot be “created” or “implemented” by management decree, no matter how sincere their intentions. Every organization hardware accomplishment summary a safety culture. It is embodied in the way the organization and its members approach safety in their jobs. If positive aspects of culture are to emerge, the organization’s management must set up the policies and processes that create a working environment that fosters routine safety behaviors. That is the purpose of the short messaging service processes. 2.3 short messaging service Fundamentals short messaging service can be a complex topic with many aspects to consider, but the defining characteristic of an short messaging service is that it is a decision making system. An short messaging service does not have to be an extensive, expensive, or sophisticated array of techniques to rtca document (“document order”) what it is supposed to do. Rather, an short messaging service is built by structuring your safety management around four components: safety policy, safety risk management (SRM), safety assurance (SA), and safety promotion. A brief description of these components is provided below. Safety Policy Safety policy is where you set objectives, assign responsibilities, and set standards. It is also where management conveys its commitment to the safety performance of the organization to its employees. As safety risk management and SA processes are developed, you will come back to the safety policy to ensure that the commitments in the policy are being realized and the standards are being upheld. Safety Risk Management The safety risk management component provides a decision making process for identifying hazards and mitigating risk based on a thorough understanding of the organization’s system. For D&M, “a system” includes the product as well as the organization’s operating environment. Refer to Section 1.2 and Appendix A for more discussion of a D&M organization’s operating environment and system description. safety risk management includes decision making regarding management acceptance of aviation safety risk. The safety risk management component is the organization’s way of fulfilling its commitment to consider aviation safety risk and to reduce or maintain it to an acceptable level. In that sense, safety risk management is a design process, a way to incorporate risk controls into processes, products, and services or to redesign controls where existing ones are not meeting the organization’s needs. Safety Assurance SA provides the necessary processes to give you confidence that your system is meeting your organization’s safety objectives and that your mitigations, or risk controls, developed under safety risk management are working. In SA, the goal is to watch what is going on and review what hardware accomplishment summary happened to ensure the organization’s objectives are being met. Thus, SA requires monitoring and measuring safety performance of operational processes related to the product and continuously improving the level of safety performance. Strong SA processes will yield information used to maintain the integrity of risk controls. SA processes are thus a means of assuring the aviation safety performance of the organization by assuring the safety performance of its product in the operating environment, keeping it on track, correcting it where necessary, and identifying needs for rethinking existing processes. Safety Promotion The last component, safety promotion, is designed to ensure that employees have a solid foundation regarding their safety responsibilities, the organization’s safety policies and expectations, reporting procedures, and a familiarity with risk controls. Thus, training and communication are the two key areas of safety promotion. An short messaging service does not have to be large, complex, or expensive in order to add value. If there is active involvement by the organization’s leaders, open lines of communication are maintained up and down the organization and among peers, there is vigilance in looking for new hazards, and employees know that aviation safety is an essential part of their job performance, the organization will have an effective short messaging service that helps make better aviation safety management decisions. Figure 3, Safety Management Decision-making Processes provides an expanded view of the principal two sets of processes of the SMS: safety risk management and SA. The discussion that follows introduces some key terms and concepts related to short messaging service processes. A more detailed discussion of the safety risk management and SA processes is set out in sections 2.9 and 2.10 of this NAS. Because safety management is a decision-making process, the safety risk management and SA processes follow a set of processes outlined in Figure 3. These processes work as follows. The Description and Context step requires the user of the process to gain an overall understanding and context of the operation that is either being performed or will be performed. The Specific Information step requires the user of the process to obtain information about aspects of the systems and environments involved that may present risk. Under the Analysis step, the user analyzes or makes sense of that information. The Assessment step requires the user to make decisions regarding the acceptability or risk of system performance. Finally, under the Resolution step, the user takes the necessary action. 2.4 short messaging service for Design and Manufacturing An short messaging service includes organizational considerations intended to enhance aviation safety. The objective of short messaging service for D&M is to manage safety risk associated with the in-service operation of a product. short messaging service should be applied throughout all phases of the product's life cycle to enhance aviation safety and meet the continued airworthiness objective. An short messaging service does not relieve a certificate holder from compliance with the applicable certification procedures (such as 14 code of federal regulations 21.17 and 21.101), airworthiness regulations (such as 14 code of federal regulations 25.1309), or manufacturing quality system (QS) regulations (such as 14 code of federal regulations 21.137). Nor does compliance with part 5 short messaging service circumvent acceptable compliance with those or any other existing regulations. Although D&M organizations need to apply safety risk management (SRM) and safety assurance (SA) to compliance assurance processes, they are not required to develop new processes if the existing processes meet the intent of part 5. The process of setting safety objectives and monitoring, measuring, and assessing safety performance against the safety objectives can be simplified and appropriately focused when the organization is able to correctly and completely understand its system. This is because the system description enables the organization to identify operational processes and aspects of the operational environment that are appropriate to be monitored. With regard to performing safety risk management considering a system’s operating environment, there are no industry-accepted methods to conduct quantitative safety risk assessments of organizations. Therefore, qualitative assessments are acceptable. As an organization’s short messaging service matures and continually improves, the organization should be able to gain insight into the organizational factors in its own system, enhancing its SRM. 2.5 short messaging service and Product Life Cycle For D&M organizations, the management of aviation safety necessarily results in emphasis on the product produced by the organization. To facilitate clear understanding, the relationship between design and production aspects of short messaging service may be considered according to product life cycle. short messaging service for D&M addresses the three phases in a product’s life cycle: design and showing of compliance (i.e., design and certification), production and airworthiness certification, and continued airworthiness. The existing certification procedural and airworthiness regulations required during the design and showing of compliance phase are intended to ensure the product is safe. Therefore, a design organization inherently fulfills much of the product-related intent of short messaging service for the design and showing of compliance phase when it designs and certifies a product pursuant to the existing procedural (14 code of federal regulations part 21) and airworthiness (14 code of federal regulations parts 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 33, and 35) regulations. The existing production regulations required to get a production approval are intended to ensure each product conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. These regulations require 1) a system in place for identifying, analyzing, and initiating appropriate corrective action for products that have been released from the QS and that rtca document (“document order”) not conform to the applicable design data or quality system requirements; 2) procedures for receiving and processing feedback on in service failures, malfunctions, and defects; and 3) a process for assisting the design approval holder to address any in-service problem involving design changes and determine if any changes to the instructions for continued airworthiness are necessary. Therefore, an organization inherently fulfills much of the product-related intent of short messaging service for the production and airworthiness certification life cycle phase when its QS is in accordance with the part 21 QS regulations. An effectively functioning continued operational safety (COS) program inherently fulfills much of the product-related intent of short messaging service for the continued airworthiness life cycle phase. Additionally, manufacturing organizations perform the important function of supporting continued operational safety programs by coordinating information regarding quality escapes, in-service failures, malfunctions, and defects with the design approval holder. However, although many organizations have continued operational safety programs with working agreements between the organization and the FAA, these programs are only required by regulation for Organization Designation Authorization (ODA) holders approved under 14 code of federal regulations part 183, subpart D, specifically § 183.63. Thus, many of the processes established for compliance with existing regulations could be used to meet short messaging service requirements. Likewise, there may be processes developed by D&M organizations, but not directly linked to compliance with existing regulations, that could satisfy the intent of SMS. Whatever the case, it will still be the D&M organization’s responsibility to show how existing processes fulfill short messaging service requirements. The following sections of this NAS contain more specific descriptions of acceptable means of compliance and how aspects of a D&M organization’s design, certification, production, and continued airworthiness processes and procedures may be acceptable means of compliance with part 5. The following descriptions of the three life cycle phases apply throughout this NAS. These descriptions are used to facilitate conceptual understanding of the application of short messaging service in design and manufacturing. It is important to note that when considering existing processes in any organization, there may be considerable overlap and merging of the phases. As an example, in many cases of certifying a product, there must be production during the design and the showing of compliance phase of test articles that conform to the current design. Thus, the organization’s short messaging service might need to encompass the application of production configuration management process(es) and production conformity assurance process(es)during the design and showing of compliance phase. Design and Showing of Compliance (Certification) Phase. This phase starts at the application for a design approval or a change to a certified design. If the D&M organization desires federal aviation administration involvement before application, it is the organization’s prerogative to request that involvement. Production and Airworthiness Certification Phase. This phase starts with the manufacture of conformed parts. Continued Airworthiness Phase. This phase starts when a type certificate or test case is issued and continues until the type certificate or test case is surrendered, suspended, or revoked. It includes each product produced while the organization holds the respective design or production approval. 2.6 Relationship between short messaging service and QS A production approval holder that manufactures a product is required to have a QS that meets the requirements of § 21.137. Those requirements are the minimum elements necessary to ensure each product and article conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. Many organizations have elected to implement a quality management system (QMS) that not only satisfies the requirements of § 21.137 but accomplishes organizational objectives beyond the regulations. Although quality management system processes might also satisfy some part 5 requirements, this NAS is necessarily limited to discussion of the extent to which an organization’s existing processes used to satisfy the minimum QS requirements might also satisfy some part 5 requirements. An organization with a quality management system that includes processes exceeding the minimum QS requirements may wish to evaluate in a gap analysis whether those processes also satisfy part 5 requirements. If they do, and if the organization wishes to use those processes for its SMS, they should be included in the short messaging service implementation plan and documentation. short messaging service and QS share many similarities and commonalities. For example, both systems: Must be planned and managed Depend on measurement and monitoring of performance indicators Involve organizational functions related to the design and manufacture of products Emphasize the identification of ineffective processes and procedures that must be modified to achieve performance objectives Use similar tools, such as root cause analysis and statistical trending analysis Establishing a close relationship between short messaging service and QS is possible and even desirable. Processes used in a QS to accomplish auditing, inspection, investigation, root cause analysis, statistical analysis, change management, and other functions are also beneficial for an SMS. Also, quality principles, policies, and practices are closely linked to safety management objectives. Because of the similarities between the two systems, an organization that uses a quality management system to satisfy its part 21 QS requirements may satisfy much of its short messaging service requirements. However, differences exist between a QS and a part 5 SMS, which hardware accomplishment summary the objective of effectively managing aviation safety risk. A QS focuses on the products and services of the organization, with the primary aeronautical information manual of ensuring identified requirements are met. Regarding compliance with part 21, this is accomplished by ensuring the product conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. A part 21 QS also requires procedures for receiving and processing feedback on in-service failures, malfunctions, and defects as well as addressing quality escapes. When the QS links its procedures for assessing in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes with the design organization’s continued operational safety process, it hardware accomplishment summary in part satisfied part 5 safety risk management and SA requirements. short messaging service and QS are complementary, not adversarial. An short messaging service builds on QS principles, and should include both safety management and quality management policies and procedures. Therefore, some features of a QS may serve as complementary features of an SMS. When manufacturing and quality processes result in a product that conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation, an acceptable level of safety hardware accomplishment summary been achieved from a manufacturing standpoint. However, production or quality issues may arise that represent hazards requiring application of SRM. The production organization must have the capability to identify product and organizational hazards, assess aviation safety risks arising from those hazards, and develop safety risk controls, or have the capability for its short messaging service to interact with the design organization to accomplish product related SRM. This is the key distinction for a manufacturing organization between managing safety risk via short messaging service and ensuring conformity to approved design and condition for safe operation via QS. 2.7 Part 5 short messaging service Considerations: Subpart A - General Part 5 is meant to apply to organizations of various sizes and complexities, as well as adapt to fit the different types of organizations in the aerospace information report transportation system and operations within an individual company. The short messaging service framework in part 5 is consistent with AC 120-92B, Safety Management Systems for Aviation Service Providers, and federal aviation administration Order 8000.367A, Aviation Safety (AVS) Safety Management System Requirements. All of the requirements of part 5, except § 5.1 and § 5.27, apply for implementation of an acceptable short messaging service in a D&M organization. At the time of this writing, § 5.1 applies only to a certificate holder under 14 code of federal regulations part 119 authorized to conduct operations in accordance with the requirements of 14 code of federal regulations part 121, and § 5.27 is not appropriate for D&M organizations. In the event the federal aviation administration mandates short messaging service for D&M organizations, it is possible that § 5.1 would be revised and become applicable for a D&M organization. § 5.1 Applicability. (a) A certificate holder under part 119 of this chapter authorized to conduct operations in accordance with the requirements of part 121 of this chapter must have a Safety Management System that meets the requirements of this part and is acceptable to the Administrator by March 9, 2018. (b) A certificate holder must submit an implementation plan to the federal aviation administration Administrator for review no later than September 9, 2015. The implementation plan must be approved no later than March 9, 2016. (c) The implementation plan may include any of the certificate holder’s existing programs, policies, or procedures that it intends to use to meet the requirements of this part, including components of an existing SMS. At the time of this writing, § 5.1 establishes for aerospace information report carriers specific periods of time during which organizations should be able to develop a plan for a functional short messaging service and implement the plan to a level acceptable to the Administrator. Until part 5 is made applicable to D&M organizations, the specified time periods rtca document (“document order”) not apply. A D&M organization wishing to voluntarily develop an short messaging service should identify its proposed timing as part of its implementation plan. The implementation plan will serve to advise the federal aviation administration of the information needed to allocate the necessary resources for review and acceptance of the plan, as well as oversight of the voluntary implementation. For more information on implementation planning, refer to appendix C. Pursuant to § 5.1(c), an organization may use appropriate existing programs, policies, or procedures to meet the short messaging service requirements. Part 5 should be understood as performance-based regulation, without prescriptive requirements as to the processes and procedures used to achieve the required performance. Part 5 is intended to give organizations maximum flexibility to plan, develop, and implement short messaging service using processes and procedures that work best for the particular organization. Inherently, short messaging service is a data driven approach that enables data-driven decisions about safety risk. The processes an organization uses to comply with part 5 requirements should be tailored for the data types and availability applicable to the organization. The flexibility allowed by part 5 necessarily leads to varied implementation among organizations. Generic short messaging service implementation models often include an initial phase of planning for an SMS, followed by a phase of development for so-called “reactive” processes, then a phase of development for “proactive” processes. However, part 5 does not require an implementation plan to identify any processes as either reactive or proactive, nor to specify any implementation phase as reactive or proactive. An organization may have one or more processes that simultaneously accomplish both reactive and proactive consideration. Identifying processes as “proactive” or “reactive” is not as important as developing short messaging service processes that identify hazards and perform safety risk management wherever those hazards arise, consistent with the organization’s system description and within the constraints of the organization’s data types and availability. In essence, relevant to its system description and data availability, an organization should look both ahead (asking “What could go around wrong, and why?”) and behind (asking “Something went wrong—why?”). Some organizations may have existing processes that allow accelerated implementation, in that those processes already fully or partially satisfy part 5 requirements. Some organizations may have an existing short messaging service that already meets part 5 requirements. Although the applicability requirements for D&M suggest there will likely be significant commonality in implementation among organizations, organizations are not required to follow any particular implementation plan arrangement. A gap analysis of existing processes compared to part 5 requirements, as discussed in appendix C, can help the D&M organization determine which existing processes may satisfy the requirements of part 5. § 5.3 General requirements. (a) Any certificate holder required to have a Safety Management System under this part must submit the Safety Management System to the Administrator for acceptance. The short messaging service must be appropriate to the size, scope, and complexity of the certificate holder’s operation and include at least the following components: (1) Safety policy in accordance with the requirements of subpart B of this part; (2) Safety risk management in accordance with the requirements of subpart C of this part; (3) Safety assurance in accordance with the requirements of subpart D of this part; and (4) Safety promotion in accordance with the requirements of subpart E of this part. (b) The Safety Management System must be maintained in accordance with the recordkeeping requirements in subpart F of this part. (c) The Safety Management System must ensure compliance with the relevant regulatory standards in chapter I of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 2.7.1 Section 5.3(a), Submission of the short messaging service to the Administrator for Acceptance A D&M organization submitting an SMS, including for voluntary implementation, should ensure it includes the components specified in § 5.3(a): Safety policy in accordance with the requirements of subpart B, safety risk management in accordance with the requirements of subpart C, SA in accordance with the requirements of subpart D, and Safety promotion in accordance with the requirements of subpart E. The differences in size among organizations that affect short messaging service are primarily the size and complexity of the operations to be covered, volume of data available, size of the employee workforce, the potential for risk to be introduced into the aerospace system, and resources needed to manage the organization. The four required short messaging service components (safety policy, SRM, SA, and safety promotion) are the same regardless of an organization’s size. However, part 5 allows organizations of different sizes to meet those requirements in different ways. The short messaging service functions rtca document (“document order”) not need to be extensive or complex to be effective. All businesses, regardless of size, may use existing resources to document and track safety issues and resolve them. The regulations rtca document (“document order”) not specify the form or format of documentation used by an organization to submit its short messaging service to the Administrator for acceptance. For many organizations, a Safety Management System Manual in a format chosen by the organization will be a practical means of describing its SMS. Regardless of the format chosen, it should be consistent with the size and complexity of the organization. A D&M organization should review any published federal aviation administration policy or Order regarding acceptance of short messaging service for D&M organizations for the process of submission. The organization should coordinate with its cognizant federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Office (ACO) or Manufacturing Inspection District Office (MIDO) and the federal aviation administration System Performance and Development Branch (AIR-150) for the process of submission. 2.7.2 Section 5.3(b), Maintenance of the short messaging service Regardless of format, an organization’s short messaging service submission must clearly show how the short messaging service fulfills the four short messaging service components required by § 5.3(a). That is, appropriate processes and/or procedures are in place, they are suitable for the size and complexity of the organization and there is evidence the processes and/or procedures are being used. It should clearly describe any other components or features the organization elects to include in its SMS, including the processes and procedures to maintain the documentation and records required by subpart F. 2.7.3 Section 5.3(c), Compliance with Regulatory Standards The short messaging service requirements described in part 5 rtca document (“document order”) not replace, and may not be substituted for, compliance with existing technical or performance standards, such as the airworthiness requirements of part 23 or part 25. An organization may not use any output of its short messaging service to allow or justify noncompliance with airworthiness or other requirements. short messaging service outputs may nevertheless form one part of a showing of equivalent level of safety or may be part of substantiation for other risk-based assessments. short messaging service processes may be used as an acceptable means of compliance with certain requirements, such as reporting pursuant to 14 code of federal regulations 21.3. At the same time, short messaging service requirements are not intended to duplicate any existing obligation of an approval or certificate holder. For example, part 5 does not require reporting of safety information to the FAA. Therefore, it does not duplicate reporting required pursuant to § 21.3, but neither does it relieve an organization from any requirement for such reports. This does not preclude use of an short messaging service process to accomplish required reporting. An organization should ensure its short messaging service is not structured such that it conflicts with the organization’s ability to comply with other requirements. § 5.5 Definitions. Hazard means a condition that could foreseeably cause or contribute to an aircraft accident as defined in 49 code of federal regulations 830.2. Risk means the composite of predicted severity and likelihood of the potential effect of a hazard. Risk control means a means to reduce or eliminate the effects of hazards. Safety assurance means processes within the short messaging service that function systematically to ensure the performance and effectiveness of safety risk controls and that the organization meets or exceeds its safety objectives through the collection, analysis, and assessment of information. Safety Management System (SMS) means the formal, top-down, organization-wide approach to managing safety risk and assuring the effectiveness of safety risk controls. It includes systematic procedures, practices, and policies for the management of safety risk. A safety objective means a measurable goal or desirable outcome related to safety. Safety performance means realized or actual safety accomplishment relative to the organization's safety objectives. Safety policy means the certificate holder’s documented commitment to safety, which defines its safety objectives and the accountabilities and responsibilities of its employees in regard to safety. Safety promotion means a combination of training and communication of safety information to support the implementation and operation of an short messaging service in an organization. Safety Risk Management is a process within the short messaging service that describes the system, identifies hazards, and analyzes, assesses, and controls risks. The following definitions apply to other terms used in this NAS: Aircraft Accident. Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR) 830.2 defines an aircraft accident as “an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight and all such persons have disembarked, and in which any person suffers death or serious injury, or in which the aircraft receives substantial damage.” Continued Operational Safety (COS). continued operational safety is assurance of a product’s safety throughout its service life. This involves problem prevention, service monitoring, and corrective actions that feed back into a product’s design and production. Foreseeably. An occurrence is considered foreseeable if a reasonable person should have anticipated that kind of occurrence under the circumstances. Identification of every conceivable or theoretically possible hazard is neither possible nor desirable; therefore, judgment is required to determine the adequate level of detail in hazard identification. D&M organizations should exercise due diligence in identifying significant and reasonably foreseeable hazards related to their operations. Note: Regarding product design, the term “foreseeably” is intended to be consistent with its use in airworthiness regulations, policy, and guidance. Procedure. A procedure defines the specific instructions necessary to perform a task or part of a process. Process. A process is an interrelated or interacting set of activities that transforms inputs into outputs. Safety Lessons Learned. Safety lessons learned are experiences, either by the specific organization or from other sources, that were considered or discovered to represent unacceptable aviation safety risk, and remain unaddressed explicitly by regulation. Safety Objective. The safety objectives defined in the regulation may be either outcome-based or process-based. 2.8 Part 5 short messaging service Considerations: Subpart B – Safety Policy All organizations must define policies, procedures, and organizational structures to accomplish their safety objectives and goals. A documented safety policy serves to assure the organization’s employees of management’s commitment to achieving the organization’s safety objectives, and ensures all employees are aware of their own roles in achieving and maintaining the safety objectives. § 5.21 Safety policy. (a) The certificate holder must have a safety policy that includes at least the following: (1) The safety objectives of the certificate holder. (2) A commitment of the certificate holder to fulfill the organization’s safety objectives. (3) A clear statement about the provision of the necessary resources for the implementation of the SMS. (4) A safety reporting policy that defines requirements for employee reporting of safety hazards or issues. (5) A policy that defines unacceptable behavior and conditions for disciplinary action. (6) An emergency response plan that provides for the safe transition from normal to emergency operations in accordance with the requirements of § 5.27. (b) The safety policy must be signed by the accountable executive described in § 5.25. (c) The safety policy must be documented and communicated throughout the certificate holder’s organization. (d) The safety policy must be regularly reviewed by the accountable executive to ensure it remains relevant and appropriate to the certificate holder. Safety policy is where the organization sets objectives, assigns responsibilities, and sets standards. It is also where management personnel convey to their employees their commitment to the safety performance of the organization. As safety risk management and SA processes are developed, the organization should reference the safety policy to ensure the commitments in the policy are being realized and the standards are being upheld. This section provides guidance on how the accountable executive, in coordination with other senior managers, might define safety performance objectives, assign accountability, and allocate resources. The safety policy should be appropriate to the size, scope, and complexity of the operation. Additionally, the safety policy component is where management defines its commitment to managing safety throughout the organization. 2.8.1 Section 5.21(a)(1) through (3), Safety Objectives and Commitment of Resources. A safety objective is a measurable (quantitative) goal or desirable (qualitative) outcome related to safety. In general, safety objectives should be expressed as short statements describing in broad terms what the organization hopes to achieve at a high level. There is no requirement that a safety policy statement such as that in Appendix D contain each stated safety objective, as opposed to reference to the objectives which may be described in more detail elsewhere. Examples of high-level safety objectives might include: Effectively manage safety risk Ensure the performance and effectiveness of safety risk controls aeronautical information manual for continuous improvement of the overall performance of the short messaging service Each high-level objective might have associated lower level goals. For example, lower level goals for “Effectively manage safety risk” might include: Identify safety hazards Ensure the competency of all personnel involved with safety risk management Establishing the safety objectives allows the organization to identify appropriate safety performance targets and indicators to assess safety performance in accordance with §5.73. 2.8.2 Section 5.21(a)(4) and (5), Safety Reporting and Behavior. A key aspect of the documented safety policy is the provision for employees to report safety hazards or concerns without fear of reprisal by any part of the organization, including management and labor groups or bargaining units. The disciplinary action policy includes clear statements of behavioral and performance expectations. This allows all employees to understand the limits of acceptable behavior and what disciplinary action to expect when unacceptable behavior occurs. Like safety objectives, the provisions for safety reporting and disciplinary action should be defined by the organization to best fit its policies and procedures. 2.8.3 Section 5.21(a)(6), Emergency Response Plan. Emergency response planning pursuant to § 5.27 is not applicable for a D&M organization, and therefore, organizations are not required to include such planning in safety policy. 2.8.4 Section 5.21(b) through (d), Safety Policy Signature, Communication, and Review. The requirement for the safety policy to be signed and regularly reviewed by the accountable executive is intended to engage all employees, especially management personnel, in the organization’s safety performance. The policy (which is the same policy referred to in subparts E and F of part 5) should be written in a way the organization understands, while conveying the organization’s safety objectives and its commitment to fulfilling those objectives commensurate with considerations discussed throughout this NAS. The requirement to sign the safety policy may be satisfied by an organization’s document control system. Often, such systems rtca document (“document order”) not involve a pen-and-ink signature on paper, but use electronic signatures or a defined approval process that represents the accountable executive’s approval. Appendix D contains an example of a safety policy statement that illustrates how required safety policy elements may be incorporated into the statement. Note that the safety policy statement in Appendix D is only an example, and not the only acceptable format. An organization may elect to use this example, or another safety policy statement that complies with § 5.21. § 5.23 Safety accountability and authority. (a) The certificate holder must define accountability for safety within the organization’s safety policy for the following individuals: (1) Accountable executive, as described in § 5.25. (2) All members of management in regard to developing, implementing, and maintaining short messaging service processes within their area of responsibility, including, but not limited to: (i) Hazard identification and safety risk assessment. (ii) Assuring the effectiveness of safety risk controls. (iii) Promoting safety as required in subpart E of this part. (iv) Advising the accountable executive on the performance of the short messaging service and on any need for improvement. (3) Employees relative to the certificate holder’s safety performance. (b) The certificate holder must identify the levels of management with the authority to make decisions regarding safety risk acceptance. 2.8.5 Section 5.23(a), Safety Accountability. Safety policy must describe the accountability for safety of all employees in the organization who have a role in managing safety or who can affect the organization’s safety performance. “Accountability,” as used in this NAS, refers to active management and line employee involvement and action in managing and maintaining safety performance. A D&M organization defines accountability by ensuring each of its management and line employees is aware of their specific role within short messaging service and actively participates in carrying out their SMS-related duties. Once the accountabilities for these employees have been defined, subpart D requires that these accountabilities be communicated throughout the organization. Organizations should carefully consider their identification of employees having short messaging service related duties, and the extent of those duties. Organizations should exercise due diligence in considering which employees are included in safety accountability. For example, an employee assigned to cafeteria duties may have little or no safety management accountability, whereas consideration of foreign object debris (FOD) may encompass an employee assigned lawn mowing duties where debris may be thrown near aircraft. Generally, all employees should be aware of the organization’s safety policy and how the confidential employee reporting system works. The individuals considered part of the safety accountability and authority defined in § 5.23 should be clearly described in the organization’s system description as discussion in Section 1.2, The Role of the System Description. 2.8.6 Section 5.23(b), Safety Risk Acceptance. Decision-making regarding safety risk acceptance is among the most critical roles in an organization’s SMS. The organization must identify the management levels authorized to make such decisions. An organization should, based on its size and complexity, avoid limiting risk acceptance decisions to only one or a few managers. Such a decision bottleneck would needlessly impede SRM. Different levels of management may be identified according to the nature and level of risk that is under consideration. Managers with the authority to implement changes in systems and procedures must use the short messaging service processes in managing their area of operational responsibility. They are also responsible for ensuring the effectiveness of risk controls. Through data collection methods and analytical processes in the SA component, managers can determine that risk controls are effective and that their safety performance is acceptable. § 5.25 Designation and responsibilities of required safety management personnel. (a) Designation of the accountable executive. The certificate holder must identify an accountable executive who, irrespective of other functions, satisfies the following: (1) Is the final authority over operations authorized to be conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate(s). (2) Controls the financial resources required for the operations to be conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate(s). (3) Controls the human resources required for the operations authorized to be conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate(s). (4) Retains ultimate responsibility for the safety performance of the operations conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate. (b) Responsibilities of the accountable executive. The accountable executive must accomplish the following: (1) Ensure that the short messaging service is properly implemented and performing in all areas of the certificate holder’s organization. (2) Develop and sign the safety policy of the certificate holder. (3) Communicate the safety policy throughout the certificate holder’s organization. (4) Regularly review the certificate holder’s safety policy to ensure it remains relevant and appropriate to the certificate holder. (5) Regularly review the safety performance of the certificate holder’s organization and direct actions necessary to address substandard safety performance in accordance with § 5.75. (c) Designation of management personnel. The accountable executive must designate sufficient management personnel who, on behalf of the accountable executive, are responsible for the following: (1) Coordinate implementation, maintenance, and integration of the short messaging service throughout the certificate holder’s organization. (2) Facilitate hazard identification and safety risk analysis. (3) Monitor the effectiveness of safety risk controls. (4) Ensure safety promotion throughout the certificate holder’s organization as required in subpart E of this part. (5) Regularly report to the accountable executive on the performance of the short messaging service and on any need for improvement. 2.8.7 Section 5.25(a) and (b), Designation and Responsibilities of the Accountable Executive. The requirement to designate an accountable executive and define responsibilities ensures executive management is involved in the oversight of the organization’s safety performance. Section 5.25(a) requires the organization to identify an existing person in the organization who holds the ultimate decision-making authority over the certificate holder’s operations. This person is responsible for planning, organizing, directing, and controlling the personnel, organizational structure, financial, and other resources necessary to ensure proper functioning of the SMS. As the ultimate authority responsible for the proper functioning of the SMS, the accountable executive is responsible for keeping an open line of communication with the designated management personnel, providing sufficient resources for the short messaging service to function properly, and being actively involved in the SA component of SMS. The actual title or position of the accountable executive may vary according to the business arrangements of the organization. For example, the chief executive officer of a large organization of which the D&M organization is one of multiple subsidiaries may not be an appropriate accountable executive for SMS. In such a situation, the person responsible for the subsidiary D&M organization would be an appropriate accountable executive, presuming that person had enough control over resources to effectively accomplish safety management. In smaller organizations, the accountable executive may serve in multiple positions within the company. In larger organizations, the accountable executive is responsible for ensuring management personnel are clearly designated for developing, implementing, and maintaining short messaging service processes within their area of responsibility. The accountable executive is responsible for ensuring the short messaging service is properly implemented and performing in all areas of the organization. For D&M organizations, “operations conducted under the certificate holder’s certificate” refers to activities necessary to carry out responsibilities related to holding the respective certificate, or activities which arise as a privilege of holding a certificate. 2.8.8 Section 5.25(c), Designation of Management Personnel. Section 5.25(c) requires the organization to ensure enough personnel are available to provide support for essential short messaging service functions such as analysis, assistance to operational managers in meeting their safety management responsibilities, and acting as a safety advisor to the accountable executive. These responsibilities may be carried out as collateral duties by managers referred to in § 5.23(a)(2), or the organization could assign the tasks of supporting short messaging service functions to other personnel. For example, some organizations may choose to use their existing management personnel to fulfill these responsibilities. Other organizations may organize a safety department with a number of persons or use existing personnel within each operational division. The personnel are not required to report directly to the accountable executive, but as noted in the part 5 final rule preamble, “Personnel designated to perform this function must be in positions in the organization of sufficient independence to have direct access to the accountable executive to report on the safety performance of the operation and recommend any necessary improvements.” If an accountable executive elects to designate more than one individual as management personnel, short messaging service documentation prepared pursuant to § 5.95 should include appropriate descriptions of the short messaging service roles, responsibilities, and authorities of those individuals. The documentation should include a description of the means by which those individuals interact to accomplish the requirements of this section. Nothing in this section is intended to add any requirement beyond any other section of part 5. For example, the requirements of § 5.25(c)(2) and (3) apply to the safety performance assessment required by § 5.73, and rtca document (“document order”) not create or imply any additional requirement for safety performance assessment. The responsibilities of required safety management personnel defined in § 5.25 should be clearly described in the organization’s system description as discussion in section 1.2, The Role of the System Description. § 5.27 Coordination of emergency response planning. Where emergency response procedures are necessary, the certificate holder must develop and the accountable executive must approve as part of the safety policy, an emergency response plan that addresses at least the following: (a) Delegation of emergency authority throughout the certificate holder’s organization; (b) Assignment of employee responsibilities during the emergency; and (c) Coordination of the certificate holder’s emergency response plans with the emergency response plans of other organizations it must interface with during the provision of its services. Emergency response planning pursuant to § 5.27 is not applicable for a D&M organization, and therefore coordination of such planning is not required. An organization’s D&M processes rtca document (“document order”) not affect, and are not affected by, activities that take place within a limited period of time during which an unplanned aircraft operational emergency situation exists. Business interruptions such as natural disasters or fires also rtca document (“document order”) not constitute aircraft operational emergency situations. Additionally, flight operations conducted as part of design certification and/or production functional testing are normally conducted pursuant to part 91 and are therefore not applicable pursuant to part 5. Refer to appendix B for additional information on coordination of emergency response planning. 2.9 Part 5 short messaging service Considerations: Subpart C – Safety Risk Management The following paragraphs more specifically describe an acceptable means of compliance for safety risk management for each life cycle of a product. From an short messaging service perspective, it is appropriate and desirable to focus resources where they will have a positive impact on product safety. With this goal in mind, safety risk management should be applied to substantive new processes or changes to the aspects of an organization’s operating environment that are identified in the organization’s system description (See section 1.2, The Role of the System Description). An example of a substantive new process or changed organization’s operating environment could be reallocating an organization’s continued operational safety program to an organization that hardware accomplishment summary not managed continued operational safety for that type of product or hardware accomplishment summary significantly different reporting criteria or risk analysis and/or assessment standards. Refer to appendix A for details regarding substantive changes. Conceptual Overview of safety risk management and SA. Figure 4, Safety Management Decision-making Processes, provides an expanded view of the two principal sets of short messaging service processes: safety risk management and SA. The discussion that follows introduces some key terms and concepts related to short messaging service processes. A detailed discussion of the safety risk management and SA processes is set out in sections 2.9 and 2.10 of this NAS. Because safety management is a decision-making process, the safety risk management and SA processes follow a set of processes outlined in Figure 3. These processes work as follows. The Description and Context step requires the user of the process to gain an overall understanding of the context of the operation that is either being performed or will be performed. The Specific Information step requires the user of the process to obtain information about aspects of the systems and environments involved that may present risk. Under the Analysis step, the user analyzes or makes sense of that information. The Assessment step requires the user to make decisions regarding the acceptability or risk of system performance. Finally, under the Resolution step, the user takes the necessary action. Note: Each main paragraph of this section addresses a different section of subpart C, and is divided into the following five headings: Introduction, Performance Objectives, Design and Showing of Compliance, Production and Airworthiness Certification, and Continued Airworthiness. § 5.51 Applicability. A certificate holder must apply safety risk management to the following: (a) Implementation of new systems. (b) Revision of existing systems. (c) Development of operational procedures. (d) Identification of hazards or ineffective risk controls through the safety assurance processes in subpart D of this part. 2.9.1 Introduction – Part 5, Section 5.51 Applicability. Section 5.51 requires organizations to apply safety risk management to a system when implementing new systems, revising existing systems, developing operational procedures, or identifying hazards or ineffective risk controls through the SA processes in subpart D. Typical examples which may invoke safety risk management include the following:  Design and Certification System 1) Changes to the design review process 2) Implementing a new safety critical design procedure 3) Selection of an outsourced supplier for design 4) Changes to the organization designation authorization procedures manual 5) Changes to processes for showing compliance  Production System 1) Opening a new production facility, 2) Initial selection of a supplier, 3) Developing a substantive new manufacturing process, 4) Creation of manufacturing planning (routings), 5) Creation of the QS, 6) Qualification and training of new workforce, 7) Transitioning a part from one supplier to another, 8) Substantive changes to a manufacturing process, 9) Substantive changes to manufacturing planning (routings), 10) Substantive changes to the QS, or 11) Moving a production facility  Continued Airworthiness System 1) Changes to processes that monitor the field for in-service failures or malfunctions 2) Changes to processes for releasing continued airworthiness information to operators 3) Implementing a new procedure to assess the safety risk of product anomalies A D&M organization should have documented methodologies and processes that invoke safety risk management if the organization introduces a new product or operating environment (or a substantive revision to an existing product or operating environment) for designing, certifying, or producing a product, or for the continued airworthiness of a product. The operating environment includes the operational procedures used by the organization to perform the system’s functions identified in the system description. The processes and procedures the organization uses to identify hazards or ineffective risk controls are also considered part of the system (refer to appendix A). A D&M organization should have documented methodologies and processes that invoke safety risk management when quality escapes, in-service failures, malfunctions, or defects that occur rise to the level of unacceptable safety risk. Figures 5 and 6 depict the relationship between safety risk management and SA for D&M organizations and their products and operating environments, as well as the acceptable means of compliance for part 5 considering compliance with existing certification procedural, airworthiness, and quality regulations (for example, 14 code of federal regulations parts 21, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 33, or 35). The following paragraphs provide additional discussion regarding acceptable means of compliance with safety risk management and SA (§§ 5.51, 5.53, 5.55, 5.71, 5.73, and 5.75) and necessary compliance beyond compliance with existing part 21 and airworthiness regulations (such as parts 23, 25, 25, 27, 29, 31, 33, or 35). 2.9.2 Performance Objectives. An organization’s short messaging service should include processes or procedures to ensure safety risk management is applied under any of the conditions specified in § 5.51(a) through (d), and the organization should have objective evidence it hardware accomplishment summary observed the established processes and procedures. 2.9.3 Design and Showing of Compliance. 2.9.3.1 Section 5.51(a), (b), and (c), Implementation of New Systems, Revision of Existing Systems, and Development of Operational Procedures. Organizations designing and certifying a new product or revising an existing product should have established and documented methodologies and processes for ensuring compliance with the part 21 certification procedures and appropriate airworthiness standards, leading to issuance of a type certificate or test case or other design approval. When the organization exercises those methodologies and processes for a new product or revision of an existing product and, achieves design approval, and hardware accomplishment summary considered safety lessons learned, safety risk management hardware accomplishment summary been applied with regards to compliance with § 5.51 for the product (refer to appendix E). safety risk management should also be invoked when a new or substantively revised operating environment is introduced. In the design and certification phase, the hazards associated with operating environments are those condition(s) that could foreseeably lead to a product with unacceptable risk. For substantive operating environment changes, planned or unplanned, compliance assurance processes should ensure the changes will not lead to noncompliance with unacceptable aviation safety risks. Substantive changes to an organization’s established compliance methods and processes require the application of safety risk management to the change. The development of substantive new or revised compliance methods and processes should include consideration of applicable safety lessons learned. When the organization makes substantive operating environment changes and conducts at least a qualitative assessment of those changes to control the risk of a non-compliant product with unacceptable risk and hardware accomplishment summary considered safety lessons learned associated with the operating environment, safety risk management is applied with regards to compliance with § 5.51 for the operating environment. Figure 6 above depicts this process. 2.9.3.2 Section 5.51(d), Identification of Hazards or Ineffective Risk Controls. Compliance with § 5.51(d) requires an established process to conduct safety risk management for hazards or ineffective risk controls identified as an outcome of part 5, subpart D (§ 5.73(b)) related to design and showing of compliance. Typically, the hazards from subpart D are an outcome of an organization’s continued operational safety program, and compliance with § 5.51(d) is addressed as part of the continued airworthiness life cycle phase. Additionally, during the design and certification phase, compliance with § 5.51(d) requires consideration of safety lessons learned in new design or operating environments, revisions to an existing design, or substantive changes to the operating environment. The consideration of safety lessons learned for a new or revised design is based on a safety risk assessment and control analysis pursuant to § 5.55; that is, § 5.51(d) does not require every safety lesson learned to be incorporated into the design, only an appropriate consideration to be made. Figure 5 above depicts this process. (Note that § 5.51(d) does not add additional certification basis standards outside of those required by § 21.101.) There is also the possibility of new hazards or ineffective risk controls discovered during the design and certification phase, which should be addressed as part of the iterative process of showing compliance with airworthiness requirements. For example, the applicant for certification fails a certification test, the initial test failure is analyzed, a precertification design change is introduced, and the test is rerun and the design passes. In this example, the test failure reveals an ineffective risk control, and the test failure analysis and retest constitutes a safety risk assessment and control; therefore, safety risk management hardware accomplishment summary been applied during the design and certification phase. Although the certification regulatory process may satisfy the SRM/SA aspects of SMS, as described in the example, it is built into the process and may not require separate acknowledgement in the organization’s short messaging service process. 2.9.4 Production and Airworthiness Certification. 2.9.4.1 Section 5.51(a), (b), and (c), Implementation of New Systems, Revision of Existing Systems, and Development of Operational Procedures. Organizations manufacturing a new product or revising an existing product should have established and documented methodologies and processes for ensuring compliance with the part 21 production and quality requirements. An important safety risk management function of a manufacturing organization is to support continued operational safety programs by providing information regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes that could result in unacceptable aviation safety risk. Feedback processes between the manufacturing organization and an organization capable of conducting a safety risk assessment for the product (typically the product’s design organization) should be established to assure appropriate communication and feedback to support COS. The organization responsible for conducting the safety risk assessment should define what data is required from the manufacturing organization to support COS. When the manufacturing organization makes available the data regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes needed to accomplish safety risk assessment and continued operational safety for a new or revised product, an important aspect of safety risk management for manufacturing hardware accomplishment summary been met with regard to § 5.51(a), (b), and (c). Additionally, although not explicit in the part 21 QS regulations, part 5 requires the organization to conduct safety risk management when implementing new systems, revising existing systems, or developing operational procedures, such as the examples in paragraph 2.9.1, above. If these types of changes are determined to be substantive, the manufacturing organization should conduct hazard identification, safety risk assessment, and risk controls to identify and address situations that could result in quality escapes, in service failures, malfunctions, or defects that rise to the level of unacceptable safety risk. Section 5.51 does not require a manufacturing organization to duplicate design engineering expertise to conduct aviation safety risk assessments of the product. The production organization can receive support from the design or other organization to analyze and determine the level of safety risk to the fleet. 2.9.4.2 Section 5.51(d), Identification of Hazards or Ineffective Risk Controls. Feedback processes between the manufacturing organization and an organization capable of conducting safety risk management for the product (typically the product’s design organization) should be established to assure appropriate communication and feedback to support COS. The organization responsible for conducting safety risk management should define what data is required from the manufacturing organization to support COS. When the manufacturing organization makes available the data regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes needed to accomplish safety risk management and continued operational safety for a new or revised product, the intent of safety risk management hardware accomplishment summary been met with regard to § 5.51(d) for the product. Section 5.51 does not require a manufacturing organization to duplicate design engineering expertise to conduct aviation safety risk assessments of the product. Additionally, safety risk management should be applied to the feedback from the manufacturing organization’s SA (§ 5.73(b)), as depicted in Figure 7, to address operating environment situations that could result in quality escapes, in-service failures, malfunctions, or defects that rise to the level of unacceptable safety risk. Again, the manufacturing organization can receive support from the design or other organization to analyze and determine the level of safety risk to the fleet. 2.9.5 Continued Airworthiness. 2.9.5.1 Section 5.51(a), (b), (c), and (d), Implementation of New Systems, Revision of Existing Systems, Development of Operational Procedures, and Identification of Hazards or Ineffective Risk Controls. During the continued airworthiness phase, from the product perspective safety risk management should be applied when hazards or ineffective risk controls are identified as an outcome of SA (subpart D). As described in the subpart D SA sections below, a D&M organization should have established and documented SA methodologies and processes such as a continued operational safety program (refer to Figure 8 below) for:  Monitoring reported in service events; in service failures, malfunctions, or defects; quality escapes; flight test events; supplier notices of escapement; and noncompliance’s related to its product.  Analyzing the safety risk of the outcomes of those events. Assessing the risk of the outcomes to determine if risk is unacceptable. If necessary, defining safety risk controls. If an organization’s SA/SRM or continued operational safety program identifies a hazard or ineffective risk control for a product that results in a new design or a revision to an existing design of a product, the design should follow the design and showing of compliance processes outlined above. With regard to the operating environment of an organization’s SA/SRM or continued operational safety process, an organization should apply safety risk management if a new or substantive revision to the organization’s established SA/SRM or continued operational safety program is made or if the SA (subpart D) process identifies the SA/SRM or continued operational safety program is introducing hazards or ineffective risk controls to the product (refer to appendix A). Performing safety risk management for an organization’s operating environment is a qualitative assessment. As an organization’s short messaging service matures, the organization should gain additional insight into the organizational factors in its own system, and should incorporate that insight over time into the system description and analysis. During the continued airworthiness phase, part 21 regulations rtca document (“document order”) not explicitly satisfy the intent of safety risk management and SA. However, continued operational safety programs (and, for organization designation authorization holders, § 183.63) may satisfy the intent of part 5 safety risk management and SA, although § 183.63 includes requirements to notify the federal aviation administration whereas part 5 defines responsibilities of the certificated organization. § 5.53 System analysis and hazard identification. (a) When applying safety risk management, the certificate holder must analyze the systems identified in § 5.51. Those system analyses must be used to identify hazards under paragraph (c) of this section, and in developing and implementing risk controls related to the system under § 5.55(c). (b) In conducting the system analysis, the following information must be considered: (1) Function and purpose of the system. (2) The system’s operating environment. (3) An outline of the system’s processes and procedures. (4) The personnel, equipment, and facilities necessary for operation of the system. (c) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes to identify hazards within the context of the system analysis. 2.9.6 Introduction – Part 5, Section 5.53, System analysis and hazard identification. Section 5.53 requires D&M organizations to have a process to identify hazards by describing and analyzing the § 5.51 systems. For D&M, the systems include the product as well as the organization’s operating environment. The system description and analysis provides a basis for understanding possible hazards (see section 1.2, The Role of the System Description). When system descriptions already exist in the organization prior to short messaging service implementation (such as product descriptions for design and certification, or QS descriptions for production of a product) that include the information specified in § 5.53(b)(1) through (4), these descriptions may be used as compliance with § 5.53. If such system descriptions rtca document (“document order”) not exist, the organization should develop them in a format appropriate for the organization and in enough detail to allow analysis of the system for hazard identification. Qualitative assessments are considered acceptable for system analysis of an organization’s operating environment. As an organization’s short messaging service matures, the organization should gain additional insight into the organizational factors in its own system and should incorporate that insight over time into the system description and analysis. The operating environment hazards are conditions within the organizational system that could foreseeably result in noncompliance or nonconformance that, if not addressed, will rise to the level of unacceptable safety risk. Figure 6 above depicts the process for system analysis of an organization’s operating environment. A variety of references and tools are available for assistance in the identification and analysis of hazards. Some tools are available for consideration via Skybrary.aero (http://www.skybrary.aero/index.php/Hazard_Identification). The site includes links to documents that discuss techniques for safety risk management and hazard identification, such as: • FAA/EUROCONTROL ATM Safety Techniques and Toolbox (http://www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/1068.pdf)  Safety Management International Collaboration Group, Risk Based Decision Making Principles (http://www.skybrary.aero/bookshelf/books/2077.pdf) • european aviation safety agency Guidance on Hazard Identification (http://essi.easa.europa.eu/documents/ECASTSMSWG-GuidanceonHazardIdentification.pdf) • National Aerospace Laboratory NLR-CR-2004-094 Guidelines for the Identification of Hazards (http://www.nlr-atsi.nl/eCache/ATS/13/416.pdf) Other examples of hazard analysis include Systems-Theoretic Accident Model and Processes (STAMP) and System-Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA). Information about these methods is available at the website of Massachusetts Institute of Technology Professor Nancy Leveson (http://sunnyday.mit.edu/). A software tool, SafetyHAT, to facilitate STPA is available for public use at https://www.volpe.dot.gov/infrastructure-systems-and-technology/advanced-vehicle-technology/safetyhat-transportation-system. Many other safety risk management reference documents and tools not listed here are available from a variety of sources. Decisions about whether or how to incorporate any of these available tools in short messaging service implementation are at the discretion of each D&M organization. Inclusion here of any tool or reference is not intended to imply endorsement, nor to suggest that use of any tool will necessarily lead to federal aviation administration acceptance of the organization’s SMS. 2.9.7 Performance Objectives. The organization’s short messaging service should include processes and procedures to ensure its systems (both products and operating environment) are described and analyzed for use in identifying hazards, and the organization should have objective evidence it hardware accomplishment summary observed the established processes and/or procedures. 2.9.8 Design and Showing of Compliance. 2.9.8.1 Section 5.53(a) and (b), System Description and Analysis. Whether planned or a result of feedback from SA (subpart D, § 5.73(b), and subpart C, § 5.51(d)), for a new product or revision to an existing product, the description and analysis and the associated identification of hazards and implementation of risk controls would be accomplished as part of the process of showing compliance to the applicable airworthiness and part 21 certification regulations. Normally, for the design and showing of compliance life-cycle phase, the procedures used to comply with airworthiness and part 21 certification requirements will satisfy the required § 5.53 description and analysis for the product. For the organization’s operating environment, internal and external organizational interfaces should be considered. The focus should be ensuring established design certification and safety processes are followed and if new or substantively revised processes are to be used they are analyzed pursuant to § 5.53(a) and (b). Figures 9 and 10 below provide examples of design certification and safety processes used as part of the design certification process. 2.9.8.2 Section 5.53(c), Hazard Identification. For the design and showing of compliance life-cycle phase, compliance to § 5.53(c) requires identification of hazards based on consideration of safety lessons learned from SA (subpart D, § 5.73(b), and subpart C, § 5.51(d)). The requirement is inherently satisfied by certification procedures. Certification procedures and airworthiness regulations associated with products have evolved over the years, and have been promulgated based on identified hazards and subsequent risk mitigations. Additionally, design and showing of compliance processes such as those depicted in Figures 9 and 10 below, when used, identify any new hazards as the design develops from preliminary design to detailed design. The level of design validation and, for the purposes of compliance to § 5.53(c), identification of hazards, will be based on the complexity of the design. In the design and showing of compliance life cycle phase, the hazards associated with an organization’s operating environment are the conditions that could foreseeably lead to a noncompliant product that if not addressed will rise to the level of unacceptable risk. If an organization elects to use new or unestablished methods and processes, or to substantively revise existing methods and processes, it should develop and use hazard identification processes to identify conditions that could foreseeably lead to a noncompliant product with unacceptable risk. As previously discussed qualitative hazard identification processes are considered acceptable for compliance with part 5. As an organization’s short messaging service matures, the organization should gain additional insight into the organizational factors in its own system, and should incorporate that insight over time into the hazard identification processes. 2.9.9 Production and Airworthiness Certification. Manufacturing organizations operating pursuant to part 21 are required by § 21.137 to have a QS that ensures each product it produces conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. There is a correlation between the 14 QS elements in § 21.137 and the intent of short messaging service as it applies to manufacturing organizations. Manufacturing organizations implementing QS processes to satisfy the elements listed in § 21.137 (as well as processes to satisfy other requirements including 14 code of federal regulations 21.139, 21.309, and 21.609 (Location of or change to manufacturing facilities); 14 code of federal regulations 21.146, 21.316, and 21.616 (Responsibility of holder); or 14 code of federal regulations 21.150, 21.320, and 21.620 (Changes in quality system); and processes used to maintain production approval) may meet or partially meet § 5.53(a) and (b). For manufacturing organizations, the information provided to get a production approval will typically be sufficient for compliance with § 5.53 (for example, the system’s function and purpose, operating environment, or processes and procedures, personnel, equipment, and facilities). However, a manufacturing organization needs to assess the information and analysis used in support of its production certification to confirm it meets or partially meets the requirements of § 5.53(a) and (b). If the manufacturing organization’s information and analysis used in support of their production certification does not fully meet the requirements of § 5.53(a) and (b), the organization should augment them accordingly. One of the important functions of a manufacturing organization for part 5, subpart C, is to support the organization’s continued operational safety program. Such support includes providing information such as reports of in service failures, malfunctions, defects, or quality escapes. The manufacturing organization’s system analysis is not intended to require duplication of another organization, such as a design organization’s expertise with regards to identifying product hazards. For compliance with § 5.53(a), the manufacturing organization’s system analysis (or processes, such as Material Review Board authority) should have the training and competency to identify which in service failures, malfunctions, defects, or quality escapes need further analysis by a competent organization to determine if the hazards will require safety risk assessment and control pursuant to § 5.55. For a manufacturing organization, the hazards associated with an organization’s operating environment are the conditions that could foreseeably lead to a nonconforming product that if not addressed will rise to the level of unacceptable risk. If a manufacturing organization elects to use new, unestablished, or substantively revised methods, processes, equipment, facilities, or personnel, the organization should develop and use hazard identification processes to identify conditions that could foreseeably lead to a nonconforming product with unacceptable risk. Refer to Figure 6. As previously discussed, qualitative hazard identification processes are considered acceptable for compliance with part 5. As an organization’s short messaging service matures, the organization should gain additional insight into the organizational factors in its own system, and should incorporate that insight over time into the hazard identification processes. 2.9.10 Continued Airworthiness. D&M organizations should have established and documented methodologies and processes (such as a continued operational safety program) for:  Monitoring reported in service events; in-service failures, malfunctions, or defects; quality escapes; flight test events; supplier notices of escapement; and noncompliance’s related to the product certificates or approvals they hold.  Analyzing the safety risk of the outcomes of those events.  Assessing the risk of the outcomes to determine if risk is unacceptable.  If necessary, defining safety risk controls. For compliance with § 5.53, a continued operational safety or other equivalent program should include a description of the people, processes, and tools used to perform the continued operational safety process for the product for which the D&M organization holds certificates or approvals. The system descriptions of the products themselves can use the descriptions used for design and showing of compliance with § 5.53(b). If such system descriptions rtca document (“document order”) not exist or are not available, the organization should develop them in a format appropriate for the organization. As described in paragraph 5.1, the system analyses and the hazards will be different for the product than for the organization’s operating environment. Compliance with § 5.53 should include the product as well as the organization’s operating environment. Figure 8 depicts the system analysis process for identifying product hazards as well as risk assessment and control. As an organization’s process (or COS) for hazard identification matures, specific criteria or conditions that constitute hazards should be developed and documented to enhance consistency of hazard identification. For the continued airworthiness phase (or COS), the hazards associated with an organization’s operating environment are the conditions that could cause the continued operational safety program or equivalent process to not perform its intended function (that is, monitor in-service events, identify hazards, analyze risk, determine acceptable safety risk, and develop and evaluate safety risk controls) as depicted in Figure 8. Introduction of a new continued operational safety program or substantive revisions to an existing continued operational safety program should be analyzed to ensure the continued operational safety performs its intended function of monitoring in service events related to the products the organization holds certificates or approvals for, and identifying hazards associated with those events (refer to appendix A). Acceptable means of compliance with part 5, as referenced in section 2.5 of this NAS, could include either of the following:  Processes used for compliance with § 183.63 for an organization designation authorization holder (although § 183.63 includes requirements to notify the federal aviation administration whereas part 5 defines responsibilities of the certificated organization); or  A continued operational safety program that identifies hazards or ineffective risk controls, makes safety risk assessments, and defines safety risk controls when the safety assessment identifies unacceptable risk. § 5.55 Safety risk assessment and control. (a) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes to analyze safety risk associated with the hazards identified in § 5.53(c). (b) The certificate holder must define a process for conducting risk assessment that allows for the determination of acceptable safety risk. (c) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes to develop safety risk controls that are necessary as a result of the safety risk assessment process under paragraph (b) of this section. (d) The certificate holder must evaluate whether the risk will be acceptable with the proposed safety risk control applied, before the safety risk control is implemented. 2.9.11 Introduction – Part 5, Section 5.55, Safety risk assessment and control. safety risk management requires the analysis of risk to determine the severity and likelihood associated with the hazards identified in § 5.53(c). Various guidance is available for analyzing risk: General risk analysis guidance is available in international civil aviation organization Document 9859, Safety Management Manual (SMM), paragraphs 5.3.39 through 5.3.52, as well as federal aviation administration AC 120-92B, paragraph 3-4d(1). There are also industry standards that provide acceptable, but not required, guidance for conducting risk analysis, such as Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) Aerospace Recommended Practice (ARP) 4761, Guidelines and Methods for Conducting the Safety Assessment Process on Civil Airborne Systems and Equipment; ARP 5150, Safety Assessment of Transport Airplanes in commercial Service, and ARP 4754, Guidance for Development of Civil Aircraft and Systems. Specific guidance for aircraft design is available, among other places, in AC 39-8, Continued Airworthiness Assessments of Powerplant and Auxiliary Power Unit Installation of Transport Category Airplanes. When safety risk hardware accomplishment summary been analyzed, it must be assessed to determine its acceptability. For products, acceptability should be based on the corresponding regulatory requirements and technical or performance standards. During the design and showing of compliance phase, with the additional consideration of safety lessons learned, compliance with existing certification procedural and airworthiness regulations (such as 14 code of federal regulations parts 11, 21 and 23; parts 25 and 26; part 27; part 29; or part 33) defines an acceptable safety risk, as discussed in appendix E. During the production and airworthiness certification phase, safety risk acceptability is defined by the part 21 requirements for a product to conform to its approved design and be in a condition for safe operation. In some situations, conditions such as assembly variations or a need to repair damaged parts or assemblies may arise during production. There may also be instances where a “disclosure” hardware accomplishment summary been identified. A manufacturing organization, in coordination with the design organization, may use approved processes that address these situations to ensure the product conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. These approved processes are an acceptable way to achieve acceptable safety risk. During the continued airworthiness phase, safety risk acceptability is defined by provisions for continued airworthiness of products in service. Section 2.9.15 below discusses processes to analyze safety risk, conduct risk assessment, and develop and evaluate safety risk controls during the continued airworthiness phase. Safety risk acceptability during the continued airworthiness phase should be determined considering the applicable airworthiness standards and ensuring that no unsafe condition exists. When the organization determines that safety risk controls must be instituted, it should have processes to develop and implement those controls. The controls should comply with applicable requirements of 14 CFR; however, to mitigate a short-term risk, a control may not be fully compliant with applicable airworthiness regulations. Before implementing the proposed controls, the organization should determine whether the safety risk will be acceptable with the control applied. This may include short term and long-term acceptability. It is acknowledged that the long term safety risk control may not be known or its acceptability determined when the short-term risk control is implemented. federal aviation administration Order VS8000.367A requires the federal aviation administration to define a process for acceptable safety risk in the short term while long-term safety risk control/mitigation plans are developed and implemented. In some situations, a design solution may adequately mitigate the risk in the short term but is not fully certifiable because it does not fully address acceptable means of compliance. From an safety risk management perspective, it may be desirable to enhance the safety of the in-service fleet by implementing the short-term solution. In these situations, the organization should work with the federal aviation administration to establish the most appropriate approach to manage the safety of the in-service fleet. In some cases, as described below, existing processes or compliance with airworthiness and quality regulations inherently accomplish safety risk assessment and control. In those cases, additional processes to comply with § 5.55 are not required. 2.9.12 Performance Objectives. The organization’s short messaging service should include a process or processes to analyze safety risk associated with the hazards identified in § 5.53(c) and for conducting a risk assessment that allows for the determination of acceptable safety risk. The organization’s short messaging service should also include a process or processes to develop safety risk controls that are necessary as a result of the safety risk assessment processes. When a safety risk control is developed, the organization should evaluate whether the risk will be acceptable with the proposed safety risk control applied before the safety risk control is implemented. 2.9.13 Design and Showing of Compliance. Section 5.55(a), (b), (c), and (d), Processes to Analyze Safety Risk, Conduct Risk Assessment, and Develop and Evaluate Safety Risk Controls. During the design and showing of compliance phase, if safety lessons learned from SA (subpart D, § 5.73(b), and subpart C, § 5.51(d)) are considered in new or revised products, compliance to the applicable certification procedural and airworthiness regulations satisfies compliance with § 5.55. During the design and showing of compliance phase, the organization should have or develop processes and tools to develop a design and show compliance to the applicable certification procedural and airworthiness regulations. These processes and tools need to account for the organization’s operating environment. The tools should be a part of the short messaging service at the time of federal aviation administration acceptance of the SMS. Substantive changes to an organization’s established processes and tools for design and showing compliance for their product should be assessed to ensure they will continue to produce a compliant design. Figure 6 above depicts this process. 2.9.14 Production and Airworthiness Certification. 2.9.14.1 Section 5.55(a), (b), and (c), Processes to Analyze Safety Risk, Conduct Risk Assessment, and Develop and Evaluate Safety Risk Controls. An organization holding production approval is required by § 21.137 to have a QS that ensures each product it produces conforms to its approved design and is in a condition for safe operation. Although conformance to approved design is a significant component of “condition for safe operation,” it does not fully account for hazards and safety risk that might arise during production. The requirements of § 21.137, for example, rtca document (“document order”) not inherently encompass SRM. In some cases, a production approval holder may not have design engineering expertise or operational knowledge to adequately analyze the safety risk of nonconformity or deviation from the intended design. Section 5.55 does not require the production organization to duplicate the design organization’s engineering expertise for conducting aviation safety risk analysis. For compliance with § 5.55, the production organization’s system analysis (or processes, such as Material Review Board authority) should have the training and competency to identify which in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, or quality escapes need further analysis by a competent design organization to determine the safety risk. The production organization should develop risk analysis processes that support the design organization’s continued operational safety program or broader SMS. Such support would include providing information such as reports of in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, or quality escapes to the appropriate design organization (or other competent organization) to allow safety risk analysis. This would apply whether the design and production functions reside in the same organization or are separate corporate entities. The production organization must also develop its risk analysis processes to encompass its operating environment, regardless of its relationship with the product design organization. If the identified hazard is a conformity issue or the product is not in a condition for safe operation, safety risk controls may require changes to the production of the product. The production organization may still need to rely on the design organization’s (or other competent organization’s) expertise to determine an acceptable safety risk. Substantive changes to the production organization’s established processes and procedures for producing a conformed product should be assessed to ensure they will continue to produce a conformed product in a condition for safe operation. Figure 6 above depicts this process. 2.9.15 Continued Airworthiness. Section 5.55(a), (b), (c) and (d) Processes to Analyze Safety Risk, Conduct Risk Assessment, and Develop and Evaluate Safety Risk Controls. D&M organizations should have established and documented methodologies and processes (such as a continued operational safety program) for:  Monitoring reported in-service events; in-service failures, malfunctions, or defects; quality escapes; flight test events; supplier notices of escapement; and noncompliance related to the product certificates or approvals they hold.  Analyzing the safety risk of the outcomes of those events.  Assessing the risk of the outcomes to determine if risk is unacceptable.  If necessary, defining safety risk controls. For compliance with § 5.55, a continued operational safety or other equivalent program should include a description of the people, processes, and tools used to analyze safety risk, determine acceptable safety risk, and develop and evaluate safety risk controls (see section 1.2, The Role of the System Description). Although compliance with § 5.55 for determining acceptable safety risk or determining risk controls does not require approval or acceptance from the federal aviation administration of these determinations, § 5.1(a) does require an organization’s short messaging service be acceptable to the Administrator. An acceptable short messaging service could include a process of communication and coordination with the federal aviation administration to determine acceptable safety risk and risk controls. This approach would ensure recommended and mandatory risk controls are aligned. If there is a disagreement between the product certificate or approval holder and the FAA, the federal aviation administration will act pursuant to part 39 to address any unsafe condition. Under 14 code of federal regulations 21.99, the product certificate or approval holder will make available the descriptive data covering the changes (risk controls) needed for the airworthiness directive. Figure 8 depicts the system analysis process for identifying product hazards as well as risk assessment and control. As an organization’s process (or COS) for hazard identification matures, specific criteria or conditions that constitute hazards should be developed and documented to enhance consistency of hazard identification. For the continued airworthiness phase, the hazards associated with the organization’s operating environment are the conditions that could cause the continued operational safety program or equivalent process to not perform its intended function (that is, monitor in-service events, identify hazards, analyze risk, determine acceptable safety risk, and develop and evaluate safety risk controls) as depicted in Figure 8. Substantive revisions to an existing continued operational safety program should be analyzed and assessed to ensure the continued operational safety program or equivalent process continues to perform its intended function. Refer to appendix A of this NAS for details regarding substantive changes. Note: AC 39-8 provides a process for determining acceptable safety risk for engines. 2.10 Part 5 short messaging service Considerations: Subpart D – Safety Assurance SA, as defined in subpart D, monitors the “system” (see section 1.2, The Role of the System Description), gathering data to feed the safety risk management process, analyze the data and assess the safety performance of the product (effectiveness of safety risk controls) and the performance of the SMS, and drive continuous improvement of the short messaging service processes. The intent is to assess the safety performance of the product and the performance of the short messaging service against the organization’s safety objectives. Safety performance that does not support the organization’s safety objectives is then addressed either through the safety risk management process or as a subject for continuous improvement. Figure 7 above illustrates the SA process and how the data gathered under safety assurance feeds back to the safety risk management process for new hazard identification and risk assessment and, as appropriate, risk control. Figure 8 above illustrates how event data and safety performance of the product feed into the safety risk management or continued operational safety process for hazard identification and risk assessment and, as appropriate, risk control. As these two figures illustrate, SA is a data driven process that feeds into the safety risk management process and is used to identify areas of improvement in the product and the short messaging service processes. SA also requires a change management process that monitors for substantive changes in the operating environment (refer to appendix A), whether planned or unplanned, self-induced or as a result of external influences. Substantive operating environment changes need compliance and conformity assurance processes to ensure the changes will not lead to noncompliance or nonconformance with unacceptable risk. Substantive changes to the short messaging service also need a process assurance assessment to ensure the short messaging service continues to perform its intended function. Figure 6 above depicts this process. Refer to appendix A of this NAS for details regarding substantive changes. Note: Each main paragraph of this section addresses a different section of subpart D, and is divided into the following five headings: Introduction, Performance Objectives, Design and Showing of Compliance, Production and Airworthiness Certification, and Continued Airworthiness. § 5.71 Safety performance monitoring and measurement. (a) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes and systems to acquire data about its operations, products, and services to monitor the safety performance of the organization. These processes and systems must include, at a minimum, the following: (1) Monitoring of operational processes. (2) Monitoring of the operational environment to detect changes. (3) Auditing of operational processes and systems. (4) Evaluations of the short messaging service and operational processes and systems. (5) Investigations of incidents and accidents. (6) Investigations of reports regarding potential non-compliance with regulatory standards or other safety risk controls established by the certificate holder through the safety risk management process established in subpart B of this part. (7) A confidential employee reporting system in which employees can report hazards, issues, concerns, occurrences, incidents, as well as propose solutions and safety improvements. (b) The certificate holder must develop and maintain processes that analyze the data acquired through the processes and systems identified under paragraph (a) of this section and any other relevant data with respect to its operations, products, and services. 2.10.1 Introduction – Part 5, Section 5.71, Safety performance monitoring and measurement. With regard to D&M, § 5.71 requires organizations to develop and maintain processes and procedures to acquire and analyze data regarding their products and operating environment. To comply with § 5.73, organizations should use this data to assess the performance of their short messaging service and the effectiveness of their products’ safety risk controls. 2.10.2 Performance Objectives. The organization’s data gathering and analysis should be sufficient to evaluate the performance of its short messaging service and the effectiveness of its product’s safety risk controls. There should be objective evidence that the data is being used to evaluate the performance of the organization’s short messaging service and the effectiveness of its product’s safety risk controls. There should also be evidence that a confidential employee reporting system is available and is being used or employees are aware of its availability. 2.10.3 Design and Showing of Compliance. A D&M organization primarily performs safety performance monitoring and measuring during the continued airworthiness phase, monitoring in service events on its products. During the design and showing of compliance phase, the organization should monitor its processes and procedures as well as its short messaging service to ensure continued compliance. The design organization should ensure substantive changes to its operating environment will still provide a compliant product. Figure 6 above depicts this process. Preliminary design reviews and critical design reviews where design requirements, including safety requirements, are validated and verified are acceptable methods of monitoring and measuring the performance of the organization’s processes and procedures during the design and showing of compliance phase. Particular interest should be focused on the processes and procedures related to implementing safety lessons learned from subpart D, § 5.73(b), and subpart C, § 5.51(d), into the design. society of automotive engineers ARP 4754 describes an acceptable means, but not the only means, for showing compliance to § 5.71. ARP 4754 includes validation of requirements and verification of the design implementation for certification and process assurance. Auditing, either internal or external, should also be performed to monitor the organization’s design and showing of compliance processes and procedures to ensure they are being followed. The design organization should also have a confidential reporting system that allows employees to report potential aviation-related hazards with the design or its certification and, if available, proposed solutions or safety improvements. The intent of the confidential employee reporting is to ensure employees have a nonpunitive means to communicate aviation safety information to the SMS. The organization should ensure employees are aware of the confidential reporting system and are using it as appropriate. Although this is a necessary part of an SMS, for organizations that have a positive safety culture, there may be limited necessity for confidential employee reporting. Safety risk management should be applied to appropriate aviation safety concerns submitted via the confidential employee reporting system in accordance with §§ 5.73(b) and 5.51(d). Section 5.71(a)(6) is not intended to be a compliance assurance system. However, the organization’s short messaging service and SA should include monitoring its system for aviation safety concerns, whether they are a result of noncompliance or not, and applying safety risk management as appropriate. 2.10.4 Production and Airworthiness Certification. An important SA function of a manufacturing organization is to monitor its operations in support of continued operational safety programs by providing information regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes that could result in unacceptable aviation safety risk. Feedback processes between the manufacturing organization and an organization capable of conducting a safety risk assessment for the product (typically the product’s design organization) should be established to assure appropriate communication and feedback to support continued operational safety program. The organization responsible for conducting the safety risk assessment should define what data is required from the manufacturing organization to support COS. When the manufacturing organization makes available the appropriate data regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes such that safety risk assessment and continued operational safety can be accomplished for a new or revised product, an important aspect of SA for manufacturing hardware accomplishment summary been met with regard to § 5.71(a) and (b). Another important SA function of a manufacturing organization is to monitor its operating environment and substantive changes to its operations to ensure it continues to produce a conformed product in a condition for safe operation. Figure 6 above depicts this process. Auditing, either internal or external, should also be performed to monitor the organization’s short messaging service processes and procedures to ensure they are being followed. Appendix F provides a reference for organizations that currently have a production certificate and/or manufacturing organizational designation authorization. These organizations may want to use the table provided in the appendix to help assess their existing processes and procedures to determine to what extent they meet the intent of the subpart D SA requirements. Because of the manufacturer’s expertise in the build of the product, it may also be requested to support investigations of incidents and accidents. Any information from these investigations (within the limits of the investigation protocol) linked to manufacturing should be evaluated per the safety risk management process to determine any applicable risk controls. As described above, the manufacturing organization should have a confidential reporting system that allows employees to report potential aviation related hazards with the manufacture of its products, and propose solutions or safety improvements. 2.10.5 Continued Airworthiness. The organization(s) responsible for the type design and/or manufacture should have processes and procedures for monitoring its products in-service to receive data necessary to perform SRM. Figure 7 above illustrates the SA process and how the data gathered under SA feeds back to the safety risk management process for hazard identification, risk assessment, and, as appropriate, risk control. Figure 8 above illustrates how event data and safety performance of the product feed into the safety risk management or continued operational safety process for hazard identification, risk assessment, and, as appropriate, risk control. As these two figures illustrate, SA is a data-driven process that feeds into the safety risk management process and is used to identify areas of continuous improvement of the short messaging service processes. SA also requires a change management system that monitors for substantive changes in the operating environment (refer to paragraph A.2 of appendix A), whether planned or unplanned, self-induced or as a result of external influences. During the continued airworthiness phase, the organization should evaluate substantive changes to its SA or continued operational safety processes and/or operating environment changes to ensure the processes still perform their intended purpose (that is, monitoring the organization’s products in-service to receive data necessary to perform SRM). Figure 6 above depicts this process. Note: The monitoring process may include or rely on the in-service feedback received via the QS program used to comply with § 21.137(m) (or for an organization designation authorization holder, their process for compliance with § 183.63). Because incident and accident investigation is under the purview of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) (or other national agency) and controlled by their protocols, organizations should have a process or system in place to support an incident and accident investigation, if requested by the national transportation safety board (or other national agency). Any information from these investigations (within the limits of the investigation protocol) linked to the design or manufacture of the product should be evaluated per the safety risk management process to determine any applicable risk controls. The D&M organization(s) should have a confidential reporting system as described above during the continued airworthiness phase. § 5.73 Safety performance assessment. (a) The certificate holder must conduct assessments of its safety performance against its safety objectives, which include reviews by the accountable executive, to: (1) Ensure compliance with the safety risk controls established by the certificate holder. (2) Evaluate the performance of the SMS. (3) Evaluate the effectiveness of the safety risk controls established under § 5.55(c) and identify any ineffective controls. (4) Identify changes in the operational environment that may introduce new hazards. (5) Identify new hazards. (b) Upon completion of the assessment, if ineffective controls or new hazards are identified under paragraphs (a)(2) through (5) of this section, the certificate holder must use the safety risk management process described in subpart C of this part. 2.10.6 Introduction – Part 5, Section 5.73, Safety performance assessment. The organization’s short messaging service should include a process or processes to conduct assessments of its safety performance against its safety objectives, including reviews by the accountable executive, as prescribed in § 5.73(a). The safety performance assessments are twofold: the short messaging service processes’ performance and the effectiveness of risk controls for the organization’s products. Safety performance measurement is best understood as an assessment of the organization’s capability to manage risk. It is a determination of the processes’ success in managing risk and the resulting effectiveness of the implemented risk controls from both a product and organizational perspective. The safety performance assessment should also include a process or processes to use the safety risk management process described in subpart C (paragraph 5.1 above) when ineffective controls, new hazards, or potential hazards are identified during the safety performance assessment. It is neither possible nor desirable to subject all changes of any process to SRM. Only changes that potentially have a substantive impact on aviation safety management should be included. Generally, those will be changes to the policy, processes, and procedures identified in the system description as being important to aviation safety. Even though each organization is unique in its business arrangements and processes, a number of features of the operational environment are common or similar among D&M organizations. Thus, there are typical events or situations, i.e., triggers, which should be considered potentially to have substantive impact on aviation safety management. In most cases, an organization’s system description should include those common features and triggers. It should be noted that despite being common or typical, there is no requirement of part 5 that any particular feature or trigger must be included in the system description, nor be in place at the organization. However, if any are in place and the organization elects to include them in its system description, they would be encompassed by the SMS. Examples of common features and triggers include: Changes to the organization Change in ownership o Relocation o Opening a new production facility Change in the production organization, unless shown that independent checking function of demonstration of conformity is not affected Change in the parts of the org that contribute directly to the airworthiness or conformity Change to the independent monitoring (internal audit) principles Changes to responsibilities Change of head of the design or production organization Change of head of the airworthiness organization Change of head of the internal audit organization Change of responsibilities affecting airworthiness, quality, or continued operational safety o Change in continued operational safety responsible organization or location Changes to procedures related to Type certification Classification of changes and repairs as Major or Minor The treatment of major changes and major repairs The approval of the design of minor changes and minor repairs The issue of information and instructions under a privilege of the organization, e.g., organization designation authorization The approval of documentary changes to the airplane flight manual The approval of the design of major repairs Continued airworthiness Configuration control Quality system, including creation of a quality system The acceptance of design tasks undertaken by partners or design suppliers Substantive new manufacturing process Manufacturing planning, including creation of new planning Changes to resources Substantial reduction in number, qualification and/or experience of staff Changes to organization privileges or limitations cope of approval Categories of products Scope of privileges 2.10.7 Performance Objectives. There should be objective evidence that the accountable executive is conducting and reviewing an assessment of the short messaging service processes’ performance and the effectiveness of risk controls for the organization’s products. There should also be objective evidence that ineffective controls, new hazards, or potential hazards identified by the safety performance assessment are being fed back to the safety risk management process for hazard identification, risk analysis, risk assessment, and, as appropriate, risk control. 2.10.8 Design and Showing of Compliance. For D&M organizations, safety performance assessment is primarily performed as part of the continued airworthiness. During the design and showing of compliance phase, the organization should consider the safety lessons learned from analysis and testing during the design phase, along with the continued airworthiness data gathered and analyzed on existing designs. The organization should also consider these lessons learned, as applicable, in future designs or changes to design. Figure 5 above depicts this process. The design organization should also ensure substantive changes to its operating environment will still provide a compliant product. Figure 6 above depicts this process. Particular interest should be focused on the processes and procedures related to implementing safety lessons learned from subpart D, § .73(b), and subpart C, § 5.51(d), into the design. 2.10.9 Production and Airworthiness Certification. An important SA function of a manufacturing organization is to monitor its operations in support of continued operational safety programs by providing information regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes that could result in unacceptable aviation safety risk. Feedback processes between the manufacturing organization and an organization capable of conducting a safety risk assessment for the product (typically the product’s design organization) should be established to assure appropriate communication and feedback to support COS. The organization responsible for conducting the safety risk assessment should define what data is required from the manufacturing organization to support COS. When the manufacturing organization makes available the appropriate data regarding in-service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes such that safety risk assessment and continued operational safety can be accomplished for a new or revised product, an important aspect of SA for manufacturing hardware accomplishment summary been met with regard to § 5.73(a) and (b). The production organization should assess the effectiveness of controls it puts in place as corrective action for issues that have resulted in in service failures, malfunctions, defects, and quality escapes with unacceptable safety risk. If the production organization is assessing the effectiveness of its controls as part of its QS, it can be used as compliance to SA. Another important SA function of a manufacturing organization is to monitor its operating environment and substantive changes to its operations to ensure it continues to produce a conformed product in a condition for safe operation. Figure 6 above depicts this process. 2.10.10 Continued Airworthiness. SA requires an evaluation of the short messaging service processes’ performance and the effectiveness of the product’s safety risk controls. The short messaging service process performance evaluation indicators may change over time as better measures of the health of the system are understood or as the system matures. For example, during the early implementation of SMS, the percentage of applicable employees trained on short messaging service may be evaluated, and the performance of the short messaging service will be evaluated. Additionally, the short messaging service process performance indicators may not have an absolute value, nor are they intended to indicate compliance or noncompliance with § 5.73 or other airworthiness regulations. Typically, the short messaging service will be looking for trends in the performance indicators (for example, if an indicator changes more than one standard deviation negatively from the norm), in which case an assessment of the short messaging service may be warranted to better understand the negative trend and an action plan developed to improve the functioning of the SMS. Section 5.73 also requires an evaluation of how the product is performing in-service against the organization’s safety objectives defined in accordance with § 5.21(a). The organization is expected to develop and maintain appropriate safety-related performance indicators. These indicators may be precursor indicators of incidents or accidents (such as high-speed rejected takeoffs or engine inflight shutdowns). It is not expected that there would be a safety performance indicator for every safety risk control, given that compliance with each airworthiness regulation is considered a risk control. However, depending on the product there may need to be more than a single indicator. The safety risk control performance indicators may change over time to better monitor the safety risk of the current fleet. Additionally, the safety risk control performance indicators may not have an absolute value. Typically, the short messaging service will be looking for trends in the safety risk control performance indicators (for example, if the indicators change one standard deviation negatively from the norm), in which case an assessment of the existing safety risk control may be warranted to better understand the negative trend and an action plan developed to reduce the safety risk in the fleet. For example, a new product may have initial operation (“infant mortality”) problems, whereas an aging product may have wear out problems. Note: Additional guidance material on possible ways of evaluating safety performance is available, for example the safety management ICG SKYbrary site (http://www.skybrary.aero/index.php/Safety_Management_International_Collaboration_Group_(SM_ICG)#SM_ICG_Products). The safety management ICG SKYbrary guidance is not required means of compliance and is simply an available approach. Section 5.73(a)(4) also requires a change management system that assesses substantive changes in an organization’s operating environment (refer to paragraph A.2 of appendix A), whether planned or unplanned, self-induced or as a result of external influences. During the continued airworthiness phase, the organization should evaluate substantive changes to its SA or continued operational safety processes to ensure the processes still perform their intended purpose, (that is, assessing its products in-service data and performing safety risk management as appropriate when an ineffective control, new hazard, or potential hazard hardware accomplishment summary been identified). Figure 6 above depicts this process. § 5.75 Continuous improvement. The certificate holder must establish and implement processes to correct safety performance deficiencies identified in the assessments conducted under § 5.73. The intent of continuous improvement is to provide ongoing improvement in the performance of the short messaging service against the organization’s safety objectives based on the performance identified in the assessments conducted under § 5.73. Safety performance that does not support the organization’s safety objectives should be addressed as compliance with § 5.75. The intent is to use the performance assessments from § 5.73 to focus improvement where indicators identify a need for action. 2.11 Part 5 short messaging service Considerations: Subpart E – Safety Promotion § 5.91 Competencies and training. The certificate holder must provide training to each individual identified in § 5.23 to ensure the individuals attain and maintain the competencies necessary to perform their duties relevant to the operation and performance of the SMS. Organizations must provide training for employees identified under § 5.23 to ensure they are competent to perform their duties relevant to the operation and performance of the SMS. The training may be tailored to employees’ respective positions in the organization. An organization might elect not to provide short messaging service training to employees who have no SMS-related duties, such as the cafeteria worker discussed in paragraph 4.3.1 above. It is important, however, that employees having responsibilities relevant to aviation safety, even if limited in scope, know how to report safety concerns and understand that it is their responsibility to rtca document (“document order”) so. Because a key component of short messaging service is the effective control of risk, members of the organization must understand and take responsibility for the role they play in controlling risk by their actions and behavior. These members should also have access to up-to-date safety information so they can properly fulfill their roles. The organization, regardless of its size and complexity, should identify the short messaging service related competencies required for each employee and the training required to attain those competencies. The organization should expect the federal aviation administration to compare the identified employees, competencies, and training to the individuals and competencies identified in § 5.23. The required training may be incorporated into existing training programs or provided separately as appropriate for the individual employees and training content. Training may range from formal classroom training to simple alerts or notifications when changes are made to update a system. The organization should develop the content, methods of delivery, and frequency of training that best meet its needs considering the size, scope, required competencies, and complexity of the organization. Organizations of all sizes may choose to either train their employees in-house or contract out the training to outside vendors. Whichever option is taken, the training must be specific to the organization’s short messaging service and operations. Competency is an observable, measurable set of skills, knowledge, abilities, behaviors, and other characteristics that individuals exhibit as they successfully perform work functions. Competencies are typically required at different levels of proficiency depending on the work roles or occupational function. By training employees, the organization establishes competencies for all employees, commensurate with their duties relevant to the operation and performance of the SMS. Competence can be assessed at the completion of training by written, oral, or demonstration tests. As part of SA, organizations should periodically review their training program(s) to ensure those programs meet the objectives set out in the safety policy. § 5.93 Safety communication. The certificate holder must develop and maintain means for communicating safety information that, at a minimum: (a) Ensures that employees are aware of the short messaging service policies, processes, and tools that are relevant to their responsibilities. (b) Conveys hazard information relevant to the employee’s responsibilities. (c) Explains why safety actions have been taken. (d) Explains why safety procedures are introduced or changed. Communication is essential to hazard reporting, sharing of information, and building a positive safety culture. The organization should put in place processes, or use existing processes, that allow for open and clear communication among employees and management. The requirements of § 5.93 are intended to foster an environment of collaboration, trust, and respect. The organization should communicate its goals and objectives as well as the current status of its activities and significant events related to safety management. Effective communication involves adjusting the content of the communication and the way in which the information is delivered to match the target employee’s role in the organization. The delivery system should be appropriate for the size and complexity of the organization. Safety policy and information could be provided as text, visual media such as posters or short videos, orally, or through examples. Messages should be consistent and in a form employees at each level can relate to, and be delivered using whichever media the organization hardware accomplishment summary available. These media could include posters, bulletins, videos, crew or team briefings, safety meetings, intranet websites, or other means as appropriate depending on the size and complexity of the organization. 2.12 Part 5 short messaging service Considerations: Subpart F – Safety Documentation and Recordkeeping Documentation of short messaging service requirements, processes and procedures, and outputs is necessary for organizations to conduct a meaningful analysis under safety risk management and to review safety assurance activities. Documentation and recordkeeping also ensure safety-related decisions are consistent with safety policies and goals and provide historical information that can be used to make future safety-related decisions. § 5.95 short messaging service documentation. The certificate holder must develop and maintain short messaging service documentation that describes the certificate holder’s: (a) Safety policy. (b) short messaging service processes and procedures. Documentation of an organization’s short messaging service policy, processes and procedures includes the steps involved, methods to be used, and associated criteria, objectives, expected outputs, and outcomes necessary to meet the regulatory requirements. The manner and format of documentation is at the election of the organization. The organization should have a document management system to maintain the documents dealing with these policies, processes, and procedures. § 5.97 short messaging service records. (a) The certificate holder must maintain records of outputs of safety risk management processes as described in subpart C of this part. Such records must be retained for as long as the control remains relevant to the operation. (b) The certificate holder must maintain records of outputs of safety assurance processes as described in subpart D of this part. Such records must be retained for a minimum of 5 years. (c) The certificate holder must maintain a record of all training provided under § 5.91 for each individual. Such records must be retained for as long as the individual is employed by the certificate holder. (d) The certificate holder must retain records of all communications provided under § 5.93 for a minimum of 24 consecutive calendar months. The timeline associated with the retention of the documents required by the regulation for outputs of safety risk management processes would be for as long as they remain relevant to the operation. For risk assessments, this may mean for as long as the activity for which the risk assessment was conducted remains in operation. For risk controls, it may mean for as long as the risk control remains in effect. The requirement to maintain records of outputs does not in itself create any requirement to submit those records to the FAA. However, these records should be made available during federal aviation administration oversight visits. The requirements of this section are not intended to require an organization to retroactively maintain or recreate records before its short messaging service implementation. The requirements related to short messaging service records apply beginning with short messaging service implementation. APPENDIX A – safety risk management ADDITIONAL EXPLANATION A.1 System Description (see section 1.2, The Role of the System Description) A.1.1 For applying SRM, it is important that an organization describes its own system in a level of detail that is understandable to its personnel. Where an organization documents its policy and procedures for D&M and continued airworthiness, this documentation will likely constitute the required system description from an organizational operating environment perspective. For the product, the description sed for certification purposes will normally be appropriate. A.1.2 A good system description is the foundation for conducting a sound safety analysis. The system description provides information that serves as the basis to identify all hazards and their associated safety risk. In this step, it is important to— Define and document the scope and objectives related to the system in which the issue/item exists. Describe and model the system and operation in enough detail for the safety analysis to proceed to the next stage—identifying hazards. For instance, modeling might entail creating a functional flow diagram to help depict the system and the interface with the users, other systems, or subsystems. Be aware that your organization’s system is always a subcomponent of a larger aerospace information report transportation system and may impact the interfaces with other aerospace information report transportation systems. For example, a change to the design of an aircraft will likely impact the maintenance and/or operation of that aircraft type. A.1.3 When describing the system, the following should be considered, as appropriate: Interactions with other systems in the aerospace information report transportation system;  Function of the system being assessed; System’s supporting processes and procedures; Personnel, equipment, and facilities required for the design, certification, or production of the product and its continued airworthiness; Operational practices of the product/aircraft operator or flightcrews; and Interactions with other systems in the aerospace information report transportation system. A.1.4 The system description will enable the analyst to define the scope of the risk analysis. Because a complete and accurate system description is the foundation for conducting a thorough risk analysis, it needs to exhibit two essential characteristics—correctness and completeness. Correctness in a description means it accurately reflects the system without ambiguity or error. Completeness means nothing hardware accomplishment summary been omitted and everything stated is essential and appropriate to the level of detail. A.1.5 A description of the system may require multiple sections or a single paragraph; length is not important, as long as the description covers all of the essential elements. It is vital that the description of the system be correct and complete. If the description is vague, incomplete, or otherwise unclear, it should be clarified before continuing the safety risk analysis. Questions to consider include the following: What is the purpose of the system? How will the system be used? What are the system functions? What are the system boundaries and external interfaces? What is the environment in which the system will operate? What are the interconnectivity and/or interdependencies between systems? A.2 Organization’s Operating Environment. A.2.1 The most straightforward assessment of the risk associated with a hazard is to consider the impact on continued safe flight and landing. Occurrences resulting from product and component failures can be extrapolated through analysis and experience to the direct impact on the airplane’s safety. Data collection and analysis techniques have progressed to where this analysis is often accomplished quantitatively. AC 39-8 is an example of a quantitative safety risk management approach. A.2.2 Because of the complex and interconnected nature of the aviation industry, some product hazards could be characterized as hazards associated with the organization’s operating environment. Understanding and managing hazards associated with the organization’s operating environment can provide preventative risk management and can mitigate multiple risk scenarios. A.2.3 A D&M organization’s operating environment encompasses aspects of the organization that are included in its SMS, as identified in the system description. Those aspects of the organization that are important to the product’s safety should be documented as part of its system description in SMS, and therefore define the bounds of the organization’s operating environment with respect to safety management. The operating environment includes the organization’s supporting processes and procedures, personnel, equipment, and facilities required for the design, certification, or production of the product and its continued airworthiness. A.2.4 Applying safety risk management to hazards associated with the organization’s operating environment will likely be done qualitatively. Translating these hazards to an outcome on an aircraft involves many assumptions including the responses of people to the conditions generated, typically by management, shareholder, and governmental decisions. In the absence of industry best practices and data collection systems focused on organizational issues, it is unreasonable to expect quantitative risk management for hazards associated with the organization’s operating environment. As an organization’s short messaging service matures and continually improves, the organization should gain additional insight into the organizational factors in its own system. A.2.5 A “substantive” new or changed D&M organization’s operating environment is a condition or hazard that could foreseeably lead to an unacceptable product safety risk. From an short messaging service perspective, it is appropriate and desirable to focus resources where they will have a positive impact on product safety. With this goal in mind, safety risk management should be applied to substantive new processes or changes to the aspects of an organization’s operating environment that are identified in the organization’s system description. An example of substantive new or changed organization’s operating environment could be reallocating an organization’s continued operational safety program to an organization that hardware accomplishment summary not managed continued operational safety for that type of product or hardware accomplishment summary significantly different reporting criteria or risk analysis and/or assessment standards. APPENDIX B – COORDINATION OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLANNING B.1 Introduction. B.1.1 Emergency response planning provides the basis for a systematic approach to managing the organization’s operations in the aftermath of a significant unplanned event or during an ongoing emergency situation. The overall objective is the safe continuation of operations and the return to normal operations as soon as possible. An short messaging service addresses hazards that could foreseeably cause or contribute to an aircraft accident. Therefore, “coordination of emergency response planning” refers to planning for activities that take place within a limited period of time during which an unplanned aircraft operational emergency situation exists. It includes the period of time required to re-establish “normal” operations following the emergency. B.1.2 For D&M organizations, business interruptions (for example, natural disasters, hostile attacks of facilities, or fires) rtca document (“document order”) not constitute an aircraft operational “emergency” for which “emergency response planning” is appropriate in the context of a regulated SMS. Interruption of the business activities of a D&M organization are distantly removed from contribution to an aircraft accident. B.1.3 The coordination of emergency response planning, as noted in § 5.27(c), applies to coordination of a “certificate holder’s emergency response plans” with the plans of “other organizations it must interface with during the provision of its services.” In some situations, an organization that does engage in emergency response activities might benefit from information provided by a D&M organization. Examples might include an aircraft rescue and fire fighting unit for accident first response activities, or an accident investigation authority for investigation activities. Provision of such information is not within the meaning of an “emergency response plan” that a D&M organization must coordinate. Further, provision of such information does not constitute “interface with” another organization that “must” be accomplished during the provision of a D&M organization’s services. B.2 Design and Type Certification. B.2.1 A D&M organization may conduct engineering flight test operations for the purpose of part 21 activities. Those operations encompass a broad range of hazards that are unique to such operations. Nevertheless, such operations are not appropriate to be subjected to § 5.27 for D&M organizations. Engineering flight test operations conducted with the participation of federal aviation administration personnel or designees generally are required to be subjected to risk management as specified in federal aviation administration Order 4040.26B, Aircraft Certification Service Flight Test Risk Management Program. Among the specified requirements are project planning, descriptions of emergency procedures to be accomplished, reporting of significant events, and an accident response plan. Thus, these operations are typically conducted in a manner that significantly exceeds safety requirements for part 91 operations. Additional requirements for coordination of emergency planning are not warranted. B.2.2 Any airworthiness issues that might arise during production or engineering flight test, even issues that might affect in-service aircraft, are dealt with using the same process(es) used to deal with airworthiness issues otherwise discovered during the normal course of business. Therefore, the exercise of those processes does not constitute “emergency response” for which coordination of planning would be required. B.3 Production and Airworthiness Certification. A D&M organization may conduct production flight test operations. Production flight test operations normally occur within the confines of a quality management system. The products and articles under test normally are subjected to numerous inspections during assembly, and before and after flight. Thus, these operations already are conducted in a manner that significantly exceeds safety requirements for part 91 operations. Additional requirements for coordination of emergency planning are not warranted. B.4 Continued Airworthiness. B.4.1 D&M organizations engage airworthiness activities with regard to their products or articles. Some of those activities take place after occurrence of an aircraft accident or incident (for example, a design organization may need to consider whether accident or incident investigation findings indicate a need for airworthiness action). Those activities are part of existing regulatory responsibilities (for example, for a type certificate or test case holder complying with § 21.99), and are normal activities for such an organization. Therefore, those activities, even if they occur after an aircraft accident, rtca document (“document order”) not constitute “emergency response” on the part of D&M organizations. B.4.2 A variety of aviation operations may be conducted by a D&M organization. A D&M organization may conduct any, all, or none of the following kinds of operations: Corporate transportation, Sales and demonstration, Ferry flights, aerospace information report shows and displays, or Aerial photography. B.4.3 Typically, such operations are conducted pursuant to part 91. Part 91 operations are not to be subject to short messaging service requirements. Corporate transportation flights, sales demonstration flights, ferry flights, aerospace information report shows, and aerial photography flights are typical of flying operations that might be undertaken by virtually any part 91 operator. There is therefore no basis for any requirement that a D&M organization prepare emergency response planning for such operations. APPENDIX C – IMPLEMENTATION PLANNING C.1 Introduction. Section 5.1 would require a D&M organization to submit an implementation plan regarding how they are to show compliance with part 5 requirements, and would specify applicable timelines and compliance deadlines. Upon the federal aviation administration finding the short messaging service Implementation Plan (SMSIP) as an acceptable path for compliance, the federal aviation administration will issue approval for the SMSIP. The approved SMSIP provides a path to obtain federal aviation administration acceptance of the D&M SMS, thereby allowing for the appropriate allocation of both D&M and federal aviation administration resources to ensure compliance can be found in a timely fashion. C.2 Process Overview. The process of creating an short messaging service and getting federal aviation administration acceptance consists of the following: Mapping and analyzing your existing organization, Determining the extent to which your organization already complies with the requirements of part 5, Developing a plan to comply with the requirements of part 5 with which your organization does not already comply, Submitting an implementation plan to the federal aviation administration for approval, and federal aviation administration review and acceptance of the SMS. C.3 Mapping and Analyzing Your Organization. The first step in developing an short messaging service is mapping out and analyzing the functions of your organization that impact aviation safety. The initial mapping and analysis starts by describing and documenting your organizational structure, operating environment, and specific functions of each department throughout the product life cycle. The implementation plan must cover the functions of your organization that impact aviation safety and the complete timeline of short messaging service development. C.3.1 Organizational Description. An organizational description should detail your organization’s departments by functions, as well as management personnel responsible for the organizations systems (such as COS, certification, production, instructions for continued airworthiness, and flight test). The organizational description may include, for example, discussion of using suppliers. It is also common for unions of various employee groups to be discussed and described during the organizational description process. C.3.2 Analysis. Following the organizational description, an analysis should describe and document what each department does, identify responsible and/or accountable personnel, and record who hardware accomplishment summary authority to modify processes and procedures and accept risk for each department. C.4 Conducting a Gap Analysis. To build an implementation plan, you need to understand your current state of compliance with part 5, as well as what you may already have that could be used to satisfy the requirements of part 5. A gap analysis involves analyzing and assessing your existing programs, systems, processes, and activities with respect to short messaging service requirements found in part 5. Your company may use any technique to identify what needs to be done to implement an SMS. If you chose to use a gap analysis, the completed gap analysis will provide input for developing your implementation plan. Table C-1 below provides a means for comparing an organization’s current/proposed procedures to the regulatory requirements of part 5. Organizations may use this format or a format of their choice to document how each of its divisions (such as Design, Production, Quality, or Procurement) meets those requirements. If an organization determines that one or more of its departments is not subject to part 5, it should still document that an analysis was done, with the result being “N/A.” TABLE C-1 – PART 5 COMPLIANCE FORM Instructions – For each part 5 subsection, state the organization’s process or procedure that addresses that subsection. State whether the organization’s process or procedure is Present, Suitable, Operating, or Effective. If you determine the organization under review is not subject to a part 5 subsection, state “N/A” (not applicable) in the Organization Process/Procedure block, and “N/A” in the Present, Suitable, Operating and Effective blocks. An organization will normally need to have processes and/or procedures that are Present, Suitable, and Operating for all applicable sections of part 5 in order to obtain an federal aviation administration acceptance. Because each organization hardware accomplishment summary unique circumstances, reasonableness is required when evaluating processes and procedures. For example, an organization may elect to develop a new process to address an short messaging service requirement. Prior to implementation of the SMS, there may not have been an occasion to exercise the new process. For the purpose of federal aviation administration acceptance of the SMS, such a new process may be evaluated as “operating” if it is in place and ready to be exercised. Definitions used in Table C-1 Present: There is evidence that the organization’s processes or procedure is documented. Suitable: The organization’s processes or procedure is suitable based on the size, nature, complexity of the organization. Operating: There is evidence that the organization’s processes or procedure is in use and an output is being produced. Effective: There is evidence that the organization’s processes or procedure is effective and achieving the desired outcome. C.4.1 Gap Analysis. To establish overall organizational compliance, the D&M organization should compare its current processes to part 5 requirements. An implementation plan is then prepared to “fill the gaps” identified in the analysis. Any method and/or tool may be used by the certificate holder that ensures complete coverage of part 5 requirements. If you determine that a process in your organization satisfies part 5, your gap analysis should identify how that process meets the requirements of part 5. C.5 Preparing an Implementation Plan. C.5.1 What Is an Implementation Plan? An implementation plan is a document that outlines the steps the D&M organization plans to take to ensure it hardware accomplishment summary an short messaging service that is acceptable to the FAA. The requirements for an implementation plan are in § 5.1(b) and (c). To ensure resources are being allocated and to monitor the development and implementation of the SMS, your accountable executive should be designated before the development of the implementation plan. The accountable executive is ultimately responsible for implementation and performance of the SMS. C.5.2 What an Implementation Plan Should Cover. An implementation plan should include milestones for the development of the processes and procedures required by part 5. It should be updated as necessary as short messaging service implementation progresses. It should show a reference to each applicable part 5 section requirement and include a brief description explaining either— o How you already comply with the specified requirement, or o How you plan to comply with the requirement. The implementation plan should assign responsibility for completing implementation tasks/actions. An short messaging service process is considered “implemented” and in compliance with part 5 when: (1) all process documentation (manuals) is complete and published, (2) all process personnel are available and trained, (3) all hardware/software is available and in its location of intended use, and (4) the federal aviation administration hardware accomplishment summary validated the process. The implementation plan need not be complex or excessively detailed but should provide a basic roadmap to meet part 5 requirements. The implementation plan may consist of more than one document, combined with the gap analysis document, or created in a format useful to your organization. Similar to the gap analysis process, you should receive input from the managers of all your organizational divisions and functional areas covered by the SMS. This is necessary to form a plan filling in all the “gaps” discovered during the gap analysis. Given the considerable variation among D&M organizations, there are numerous approaches to applying for a type certificate or test case or PC, and numerous processes used to satisfy requirements for issuance of a type certificate or test case or PC. Organizations should coordinate with their cognizant ACO/MIDO to develop short messaging service implementation planning that accounts for activities that occur before or after application for type certificate or test case or personal computer approval, leading to issuance of a type certificate or test case or personal computer and federal aviation administration acceptance of the SMS. C.6 Phased short messaging service Implementation Strategy. C.6.1 Introduction. One recommended, but not required, way to implement an short messaging service is through a phased implementation approach. The sample short messaging service implementation strategy hardware accomplishment summary four phases. For example, the four levels of phased implementation could be: Level 1 - Planning and organization; Level 2 - Basic safety management; Level 3 - Fully functional SMS; and Level 4 - Continuous improvement. Using this method, the overall complexity of the task is divided into smaller, more manageable subcomponents. C.6.2 Implementation Levels—Overview. The overall objective of the levels is to develop and implement an integrated, comprehensive short messaging service for your entire organization. Phased implementation can be thought of as organizational learning—the same building block approach often used in training and education of personnel. The recommended short messaging service development levels, as follows, are suggested but not required. Your organization may determine and develop your own phases, levels, divisional implementation strategies, etc. This four-level approach is only a representative template. Figure C-1 illustrates the recommended levels of short messaging service development and implementation. C.6.2.1 Implementation Level 1—Planning and Organization. Level 1 begins when your management team commits to providing the resources necessary for full short messaging service implementation. Level 1 includes a thorough understanding of your organizational structure and a comparison (gap analysis) between the part 5 requirements and your organizational structure. Your organization will develop an implementation plan to bridge your identified gaps. Your organization will also develop an short messaging service training plan. The final implementation plan must be approved by the FAA. C.6.2.2 Implementation Level 2—Basic Safety Management. Level 2 is where you develop and implement basic safety risk management and SA processes and apply those processes to existing systems. At this phase, your company is able to identify hazards and address unacceptable risk. C.6.2.3 Implementation Level 3—Functional SMS. Level 3 is where your safety risk management process will be applied to initial design of systems, processes, organizations, and services; development of new or changed operational procedures; and planned changes to operational processes. Both the safety risk management and SA processes developed at level 2 are now applied. At the completion of level 3, you have a fully-implemented short messaging service that should satisfy compliance with part 5. This point is also where you would show compliance with part 5 and receive a letter of acceptance from the FAA. C.6.2.4 Implementation Level 4—Continual Improvement. At level 4, you are monitoring your short messaging service and operational processes. By the time you reach this level, all required short messaging service processes are already in place. A major objective of a successful short messaging service is to attain and maintain this continual improvement status for the life of the organization. C.6.3 short messaging service Implementation Layout. Table C-2 shows an example of a high-level phased implementation layout. An implementation plan prepared according to this layout would apply milestones, responsibilities, resources, and documentation. APPENDIX D – SAMPLE SAFETY POLICY STATEMENT The Executive Management of [Certificate Holder’s name] recognizes that an effective Safety Management System (SMS) is vital to the success and longevity of the Company. Therefore, the Executive Management is committed to improving and maintaining a fully functional short messaging service and to the continuous improvement of the level of safety throughout [Certificate Holder’s name]. • Executive Management of [Certificate Holder’s name] will establish specific safety-related objectives and will periodically publish and distribute those objectives and plans to all employees. • These safety objectives will be monitored, measured, and tracked to ensure overall corporate safety objectives are met. All employees and individuals in the company have the responsibility to perform their duties and activities in the safest practical manner. • [Certificate Holder’s name] Executive Management is committed to providing the necessary financial, personnel, and other resources to establish and maintain a fully functional SMS. • [Certificate Holder’s name] Executive Management is dedicated to establishing a confidential employee reporting system to report all hazards, accidents, incidents, and safety issues without fear of reprisal. • Activities involving intentional disregard for federal aviation administration regulations, company policies and procedures, illegal activities, and/or drugs or alcohol may be subject to disciplinary action. Executive Management will convey this expectation to all employees through postings, intranet site, company newsletter, and any other means to ensure all employees are aware of the company’s SMS, their duties and responsibilities, and our safety policy. This safety policy will be periodically reviewed by Executive Management to ensure it remains relevant and appropriate to the company. [Signed], Accountable Executive [Additional management personnel optional] Copyright Aerospace Industries Association of America Inc. APPENDIX E – safety risk management AND SA IN CERTIFICATION: HOW COMPLIANCE WITH AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS DURING DESIGN RELATES TO safety risk management AND SA REQUIREMENTS E.1 safety risk management Application. safety risk management is applied by the regulator in developing regulations (above the horizontal dashed line in Figure E-1 below). safety risk management is applied by the design organization to comply with the regulations (below the dashed line). A design transforms safety requirements into risk controls for a product or article. A safety requirement, in the form of an airworthiness regulation, is a safety risk control that, when complied with, constitutes an acceptable level of safety risk. Airworthiness regulations are developed when systemic hazards are discovered and the related outcome(s) have unacceptable risk. Acceptable level of risk is determined as part of the rulemaking process and summarized in the “Costs and Benefits” section of each new regulation. The acceptable level of safety can change over time (for example, refer to 14 code of federal regulations 25.561 pre-Amendment 25-64 versus 14 code of federal regulations 25.562 with Amendment 25-64). Each airworthiness regulation provides boundary conditions for a design that, when met, are expected to manage risk to acceptable levels. These boundary conditions range from prescriptive to purely performance based. The regulations typically rtca document (“document order”) not specify a detailed design solution. The design organization will design risk controls to comply with the regulations. Validating that the risk controls fulfill the safety requirements is accomplished during the certification process. The preamble to each regulation contains a discussion of the hazard that hardware accomplishment summary been identified. Many of the hazards that are being controlled via a regulation were discovered following an accident and the subsequent accident investigation. Most hazards, through combinations of other conditions/events of certain probability, can result in multiple outcomes. These outcomes will likely have varying degrees of risk due to different severity and likelihood of occurrence. The actual regulation itself describes criteria which a design must satisfy. These criteria can be considered boundary conditions for risk controls that a design organization includes in the design of its product or article. The resulting design solution is validated against the regulatory requirements. Often, the validation is supported by agreed-upon methodology and performance thresholds contained in associated ACs. In addition to the basic airworthiness regulations, the parts 21 and 11 certification procedures and exemptions require that a type-certificated product hardware accomplishment summary an acceptable level of safety and that any exemptions would benefit the public as a whole and would not adversely affect safety, or the exemption would provide a level of safety at least equal to that provided by the rule from which the exemption is sought. For example, 14 code of federal regulations 21.16 requires that if adequate or appropriate airworthiness regulations rtca document (“document order”) not exist for a novel or unusual design feature, special conditions must be issued to establish a level of safety equivalent to that established in the regulations. The part 21 certification procedures ultimately rtca document (“document order”) not allow the issuance of a type certificate or test case if there are any unsafe features or characteristics (refer to 14 code of federal regulations 21.21(b)(2)). There are other part 21 certification procedures, such as 14 code of federal regulations 21.33, that provide risk controls to ensure a safe product. Therefore, during the design and showing of compliance life-cycle phase, the airworthiness regulations and the parts 21 and 11 certification procedures and exemptions, along with consideration of safety lessons learned, achieve hazard identification, analysis of safety risk, risk assessment, and development of safety risk controls that provide an acceptable safety risk. Holders of production approvals or TCs are subject to regulatory requirements during the continued airworthiness life-cycle phase. These include requirements for reporting a variety of events and conditions such as failures, malfunctions, and defects (§§ 21.3 and 21.137(m)), and for sharing certain data with the federal aviation administration and operators (§ 21.99). These activities necessarily include the creation and exercise of processes and systems by the approval holders to (1) monitor both production of a product or article and its operation in service, (2) collect information and data, (3) analyze the information and data, and (4) communicate the information and data to the FAA. The federal aviation administration uses the information and data supplied by the approval holders and other sources to develop airworthiness regulations as described above. The following are examples of how safety risk management is satisfied through certification and design approval activities. Example 1 describes how safety risk management was used in the development of regulations. In this example, a prescriptive regulation is used by the design organizations as risk controls without needing to recreate or repeat SRM. Example 2 explains how specific regulatory design requirements, combined with a requirement that the design organization analyze for unspecified other additional risks, constitutes a “safety analysis regulation” and accomplishes the intent of part 5 safety risk management requirements. Examples 3 and 4 illustrate how safety risk management is accomplished when a design organization devises and incorporates design risk controls to comply with regulations, leading to a certified product. Example 5 shows how compliance with the regulations by a design organization accomplishes safety risk management for those design aspects that are not specifically covered by the regulations. Based on these examples, the established compliance methods and airworthiness standards that lead to certification of a safe and compliant product or article accomplish the intent of SRM. With the introduction of part 5, future rulemaking should be based on safety risk management transparently applied by the FAA’s processes. E.2 Example 1: 14 code of federal regulations 23.607, 25.607, 27.607, and 29.607, Fasteners. This example describes (above the horizontal dashed line in Figure E-1) how safety risk management was used in the development of the regulations, in this example a prescriptive regulation, which in turn are used by the design organizations as risk controls without needing to recreate or repeat SRM. The development of §§ 23.607, 25.607, 27.607, and 29.607 is a prime example of safety risk management and SA that hardware accomplishment summary already been accounted for in the design certification process by way of airworthiness regulations. Regarding fasteners, in the past (before Amendments 23-48, 25-23, 27-4, and 29-5) it was common practice in the manufacture of aircraft to secure fasteners (that is, bolts, screws, and pins) with a single locking device. While this proved adequate for most aircraft, there were a number of instances of loss of fastener integrity involving fasteners installed on rotorcraft and secured with a single locking device. This service experience represents the § 5.71 safety performance monitoring, that is, acquiring data regarding the safety of the product or article. This adverse service experience was attributed largely to the fact that fasteners used on rotorcraft are subject to greater than normal vibration. In addition, the federal aviation administration was aware that the locking devices can be adversely affected by the environmental conditions existing at the particular installation. The federal aviation administration related this service experience to fasteners whose loss could jeopardize the safe operation of the aircraft. This thought process is equivalent to performing the system analysis and hazard identification required by § 5.53, that is, identifying the function and purpose of the system, the system’s operating environment, and identifying the hazards within the context of the system analysis. In view of the adverse service experience with fasteners and the hazards identified, the federal aviation administration proposed and subsequently adopted regulations (§§ 23.607, 25.607, 27.607, and 29.607) requiring two separate locking devices on all removable fasteners in any installation in which the loss of the fastener could jeopardize the safe operation of the aircraft. Additionally, the federal aviation administration adopted, in the regulations, requirements that consideration be given to the environmental conditions associated with a particular fastener in determining the appropriate locking device for that fastener. The adoption of airworthiness regulations to address the identified hazard is equivalent to § 5.55 safety risk assessment and control, that is, an unacceptable risk was identified and a risk control put in place to maintain an acceptable safety risk. The design certification process accounts for § 5.51 applicability. If a new system (product or article) or a change to the system (product or article) is being introduced, or a change in the environment conditions (for example, higher rotor speeds) occurs, a reassessment of the hazards would take place and as appropriate, based on system analysis and hazard identification, additional compliance with § 23.607, § 25.607, § 27.607, or § 29.607 would be conducted. Compliance with § 5.73 safety performance assessment would continue to be accomplished as part of the continued operational safety programs. E.3 Example 2: 14 code of federal regulations 33.75, Safety Analysis. This example explains how specific regulatory design requirements, combined with a requirement that the design organization analyze for unspecified other additional risks, constitutes a “safety analysis regulation” and accomplishes the intent of part 5 safety risk management requirements. The engine certification process requires that the new design demonstrate compliance with a large number of regulations (part 33), each one of which represents a hazard or group of hazards identified by the FAA, and an acceptable mitigation strategy that will reduce risk to an acceptable level. In addition to these specific hazards, § 33.75 requires that the applicant analyze the proposed design for additional risks, if an engine failure should occur, and demonstrate that these risks are controlled to an acceptable level. In doing so, the intent of safety risk management is accomplished. Following is a comparison of part 5, subpart C, to § 33.75 showing the correlation of § 33.75 requirements to part 5. Comments about the correlation appear in italicized font. C.4 Example 3: in-circuit emulator Detection System. This example illustrates how safety risk management is accomplished when a design organization devises and incorporates design risk controls to comply with regulations, leading to a certified product. safety risk management typically begins with a description of the environment, operating conditions, and general product design parameters necessary to identify hazards. When showing compliance with regulations, this description is generally defined within the regulatory material and associated guidance material. The design organization will translate this general description to the actual design for which certification is being sought. Regarding in-circuit emulator detection systems, this information is contained in 14 code of federal regulations 25.1419 (Amendment 25-129); AC 25.1419-2, Compliance With the in-circuit emulator Protection Requirements of §§ 25.1419(e), (f), (g), and (h); and AC 20-73A, Aircraft in-circuit emulator Protection. These actions correspond to “Safety Analysis Regulation” and “Hazard Assessment” in Figure E-1 (below the horizontal dashed line), and are illustrated in the text of the regulation and background information provided in the following associated rulemaking material. From § 25.1419 in-circuit emulator protection: If the applicant seeks certification for flight in icing conditions, the airplane must be able to safely operate in the continuous maximum and intermittent maximum icing conditions of appendix C. To establish this— [...] (e) One of the following methods of icing detection and activation of the airframe in-circuit emulator protection system must be provided: (1) A primary in-circuit emulator detection system that automatically activates or alerts the flight crew to activate the airframe in-circuit emulator protection system; [...] From the Final Rule: On October 31, 1994, an accident involving an Avions de Transport Regional (ATR) 72 series airplane occurred in icing conditions. This prompted the federal aviation administration to initiate a review of aircraft inflight icing safety and determine changes that could be made to increase the level of safety. In May 1996, the federal aviation administration sponsored the International Conference on Aircraft Inflight Icing, in which icing specialists recommended improvements to increase the level of safety of aircraft operating in icing conditions. The federal aviation administration reviewed the conference recommendations and developed a comprehensive multi-year icing plan. The federal aviation administration Inflight Aircraft Icing Plan (Icing Plan), dated April 1997, described various activities the federal aviation administration was contemplating to improve safety when operating in icing conditions. In accordance with the Icing Plan, the federal aviation administration tasked the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC), through its in-circuit emulator Protection Harmonization Working Group, to consider the need for in-circuit emulator detectors or other acceptable means to warn flight crews of in-circuit emulator accretion on critical surfaces requiring crew action. This rule is based on ARAC’s recommendations to the FAA. From the NPRM: The notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM), Notice No. 07-07, published in the Federal Register on April 26, 2007 (72 FR 20924), is the basis for this amendment. The comment period closed July 25, 2007. In the NPRM, we proposed to revise the airworthiness standards for type certification of transport category airplanes to add requirements to ensure the timely activation of an airframe in-circuit emulator protection system (IPS). We also proposed to add requirements to reduce the flight crew workload associated with operation of an airframe IPS that is manually cycled, and to ensure the Airplane Flight Manual includes IPS procedures for operation. Neither the operating regulations nor the certification regulations require a means to warn flight crews of in-circuit emulator accretion on critical surfaces requiring crew action. The ARAC in-circuit emulator Protection Harmonization Working Group reviewed icing events and found accidents and incidents where the flight crew was either completely unaware of in-circuit emulator accretion on the airframe, or was aware of in-circuit emulator accretion, but judged that it was not significant enough to warrant operation of the airframe in-circuit emulator protection system (IPS). The ARAC in-circuit emulator Protection Harmonization Working Group concluded and recommended to the federal aviation administration that flight crews must be provided with a clear means to know when to activate the IPS. Flight crew’s observation of in-circuit emulator accretions and such observations can be difficult during times of high workload, operations at night, or when clear in-circuit emulator hardware accomplishment summary accumulated Hazard scenarios are used to model the risk analysis (“Risk Assessment” in Figure E-1, below the horizontal dashed line). Hazard Scenario Model: Hazard coupled with Linking Mechanism = Bad Outcome Hazard: Flight in icing conditions. Linking Mechanism: Failure to recognize in-circuit emulator buildup. Failure to activate in-circuit emulator protection system. Failure to activate in-circuit emulator protection system in a timely manner. Bad Outcome: Loss of lift, leading to crash. Risk Control Criteria Install an in-circuit emulator detection system to automatically alert crew to turn on in-circuit emulator protection system. Required for transport category airplanes by § 25.1419. Acceptable Risk Criteria Guidance for making a determination of acceptable risk is contained in AC 25.1419-2 and AC 20-73A. For example, paragraph 4a(7)c (System Safety Considerations) of AC 25.1419-2 states the following: The applicant should consult AC 25.1309-1A for guidance on compliance with § 25.1309. In accordance with AC 25.1309-1A, the applicant should accomplish a functional hazard assessment to determine the hazard level associated with failure of the in-circuit emulator detection system. The probability of encountering the icing conditions defined in appendix C to part 25 should be considered to be 1. The annunciated failure of a primary in-circuit emulator detection system is assumed to be a catastrophic failure condition, unless the characteristics of the airplane in icing conditions without activation of the airframe IPS(s) are demonstrated to result in a less severe hazard category. If visual cues are the primary means, the pilots retain responsibility to monitor and detect in-circuit emulator accretions when an advisory in-circuit emulator detection system is installed. However, the natural tendency of flight crews to become accustomed to using the advisory in-circuit emulator detection system elevates the importance of the detector and increases the need to make flight crews aware of an advisory in-circuit emulator detection system failure. Therefore, an undetected failure of the advisory in-circuit emulator detector should be considered as at least Major unless substantiated to be a lower failure condition classification. The hazard(s) and risk control criteria are defined and applied during design and certification. The design processes used to satisfy risk control criteria associated with compliance with §§ 25.1419 and 25.1309 necessitate that the likelihood and severity of the bad outcome(s) are used for a risk-based decision on the acceptability of the type design of the in-circuit emulator detection system. “Risk Assessment,” below the horizontal dashed line in Figure E-1 is often satisfied through industry best practices for performing safety assessments in accordance with § 25.1309. The AC 25.1309-1A material provides guidance for a determination of acceptable risk, and design decisions are thusly made (“Define Design Safety Features,” Figure E-1). The risk control, as defined through regulation culminates in a “Safe & Compliant Design” (Figure E-1) considering the specific design solution presented for compliance. Testing and further analysis are performed to validate that the as-designed risk controls meet the acceptable risk criteria contained in the rule and guidance material (“Safety Objective Defined,” Figure E-1 above the horizontal dashed line). Such validation enables, with regard to design and certification of the product or article, a conclusion of “Safety Objective Met” (Figure E-1). C.5 Example 4: 14 code of federal regulations 23.783(b), Doors. This example illustrates how safety risk management is accomplished when a design organization devises and incorporates design risk controls to comply with regulations, leading to a certified product. safety risk management typically begins with a description of the environment, operating conditions, and product design necessary to identify hazards. When showing compliance with regulations, this description is generally defined within the regulatory material and associated guidance material. The design organization will translate this general description to the actual design for which certification is being sought. Regarding location of passenger doors, this information is contained in § 23.783(b) (Amendment 25-49) and AC 23-17C, Systems and Equipment Guide for Certification of Part 23 Airplanes and Airships. These actions correspond to “Safety Analysis Regulation” and “Hazard Assessment” in Figure E-1 (below the horizontal dashed line), and are illustrated in the text of the regulation and background information provided in the following associated rulemaking material. From § 23.783 Doors: (b) Passenger doors must not be located with respect to any propeller disk or any other potential hazard so as to endanger persons using the door. From the Final Rule: This amendment completes part of an effort to harmonize the requirements of part 23 and JAR 23. The revisions to part 23 in this amendment pertain to systems and equipment airworthiness standards. Three other final rules are being issued in this Federal Register that pertain to airworthiness standards for flight, powerplant, and airframe. These related rulemakings are also part of the harmonization effort [...] In January 1991, the federal aviation administration established the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) (56 FR 2190, January 22, 1991). At an FAA/JAA Harmonization Conference in Canada in June 1992, the federal aviation administration announced that it would consolidate the harmonization effort within the ARAC structure. The federal aviation administration assigned to ARAC the rulemaking related to JAR/part 23 harmonization, which ARAC assigned to the JAR/FAR 23 Harmonization Working Group. The proposals for systems and equipment airworthiness standards contained in Notice 94-21 were a result of both the working group’s efforts and the efforts at harmonization that occurred before the formation of the working group. Section 23.783 Doors Proposed paragraph (b) would add a requirement that passenger doors must not be located near any propeller disk or any other potential hazard that could endanger persons using the door. The propeller disk remains a prominent hazard, but other items, such as hot deicer surfaces or sharp objects on the airplane structure, are also hazardous. [...] Section 23.783 is amended by revising paragraph (b) [...] to read as follows: Sec. 23.783 Doors. (b) Passenger doors must not be located with respect to any propeller disk or any other potential hazard so as to endanger persons using the door. From the NPRM: During the Part 23 harmonization effort, the federal aviation administration established an Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) (56 FR 2190, January 22, 1991), which held its first meeting on May 23, 1991. The ARAC on General Aviation and Business Airplane (GABA) Issues was established at that meeting to provide advice and recommendations to the Director, Aircraft Certification Service, FAA, regarding the airworthiness standards in Part 23 as well as related provisions of parts 91 and 135 of the regulations. The federal aviation administration announced, on June 2-5, 1992, at the JAA/FAA Harmonization Conference in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, that it would consolidate within the ARAC structure an ongoing objective to “harmonize” the JAR and the FAR. Coinciding with that announcement, the federal aviation administration assigned the ARAC on GABA Issues, those rulemaking projects related to JAR/Part 23 harmonization that were in final coordination between the joint aviation authorities and the FAA. The harmonization process included the intention to present the results of JAA/FAA coordination to the public as NPRMs. Subsequently, the AARC on GABA issues established an ARAC-JAR 23 Study Group. The JAR 23 Study Group made recommendations to the ARAC on GABA Issues concerning the federal aviation administration disposition of the rulemaking issues coordinated between the joint aviation authorities and the FAA. The draft NPRMs previously prepared by the federal aviation administration harmonization team were made available to the harmonization working group to assist them in their effort. A notice of the formation of the JAR 23 Harmonization Working Group was published on November 30, 1992 (57 FR 56626). The group held its first meeting on February 2, 1993. These efforts resulted in the proposals for systems and equipment airworthiness standards contained in this notice. The ARAC on GABA Issues agreed with these proposals. [...] Section 23.783 Doors Current Sec. 23.783(b) requires that passenger doors not be located with respect to any propeller disk so as to endanger persons using the door. Proposed paragraph (b) would add that passenger doors must be located in relation to any other potential hazard that could endanger persons using the door. The propeller disk remains a prominent hazard, but other items, such as hot deicer surfaces or sharp objects on the airplane structure, are also hazardous. [...] Section 23.783 is amended by revising paragraph (b) [...] to read as follows: Sec. 23.783 Doors. (b) Passenger doors must not be located with respect to any propeller disk or any other potential hazard so as to endanger persons using the door. Hazard scenarios are used to model the risk analysis (“Risk Assessment” in Figure E-1, below the horizontal dashed line). Hazard Scenario Model: Hazard coupled with Linking Mechanism = Bad Outcome Hazard: Proximity of passenger door to propeller disk or other hazards. Linking Mechanism: • Failure to observe moving propeller. • Failure to observe/recognize other hazards, such as hot deicer surfaces or sharp objects on the airplane structure. • Inability to maintain clearance from propeller disk or other hazard while operating door. • Slip/trip/fall while passing through door. Bad Outcome: Injury due to contact with moving propeller, hot surface, or sharp object. Risk Control Criteria Locate the passenger door(s) away from potential hazards so as not to endanger persons using the door. Acceptable Risk Criteria Criteria and guidance for making a determination of acceptable risk are contained in 14 code of federal regulations 23.783, 23.811, 23.813, 23.1301, and 23.1309, and AC 23-17C, Systems and Equipment Guide for Certification of Part 23 Airplanes and Airships. Examples of risk criteria include— 14 code of federal regulations 23.783(b): Location of passenger door with respect to a propeller disk or any other hazard must not endanger persons using the door. 14 code of federal regulations 23.811(a)(2): Each external door must be externally marked by a permanent decal which shows the means of opening including any special instructions, if applicable. Note: “Applicable” might include instructions intended to ensure clearance from hazards. 14 code of federal regulations 23.813(b)(1): The location of the passenger door must still allow for a passageway leading from the aisle to the door that is unobstructed and at least 20 inches wide. 14 code of federal regulations 23.1301(b): Installed equipment must be labeled as to its identification, function, or operating limitations, or any applicable combination of these factors. 14 code of federal regulations 23.1309(a)(2): Any equipment and system does not adversely affect the safety of the airplane or its occupants.  AC 23-17C (section on § 23.783, Doors): “The equivalent level of safety finding process for Part 23, §23.783(b), should include— [...] e. A railing or guard that would deploy to guide passengers away from the propeller plane should be provided as an integral part of the door f. If engagement of the engine starter would be an immediate hazard to a person near the propeller, an interconnection between the door and the engine starting circuit should be included in the design.” The hazard(s) and risk control criteria are defined and applied during design and certification. The design processes used to satisfy risk control criteria associated with compliance with §§ 23.783 and 23.1309 necessitate that the likelihood and severity of the bad outcome(s) are used for a risk-based decision on the acceptability of the type design of the in-circuit emulator detection system. “Risk Assessment,” below the horizontal dashed line in Figure E-1, is often satisfied through industry best practices for performing safety assessments in accordance with § 23.1309. AC 23.1309-1E material provides guidance for a determination of acceptable risk, and design decisions are thusly made (“Define Design Safety Features,” Figure E-1). The risk control, as defined through regulation, culminates in a “Safe & Compliant Design” (Figure E-1) considering the specific design solution presented for compliance. Testing and further analysis are performed to validate that the as-designed risk controls meet the acceptable risk criteria contained in the rule and guidance material (“Safety Objective Defined,” Figure E-1 above the horizontal dashed line). Such validation enables, with regard to design and certification of the product or article, a conclusion of “Safety Objective Met” (Figure E-1). C.6 Example 5: § 23.1309, Equipment, systems, and installations (Amendment 23-49); and § 23.1431, Electronic equipment (Amendment 23-49). This example shows how compliance with the regulations by a design organization accomplishes safety risk management for those design aspects that are not specifically covered by the regulations. The regulations are minimally prescriptive, and thus require the design organization to expansively identify hazards based on the design of the system and the environment in which it will operate. Referring to Figure E-1, compliance with these regulations begins with “System Analysis,” (§§ 5.51 and 5.53) then to the SRM-equivalent (§§ 5.53 and 5.55) path of “Safety Analysis Regulation” leading to a “Safe & Compliant Design.” From § 23.1309 Equipment, systems, and installations: (b) The design of each item of equipment, each system, and each installation must be examined separately and in relationship to other airplane systems and installations to determine if the airplane is dependent upon its function for continued safe flight and landing and, for airplanes not limited to visual flight rules conditions, if failure of a system would significantly reduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions. Each item of equipment, each system, and each installation identified by this examination as one upon which the airplane is dependent for proper functioning to ensure continued safe flight and landing, or whose failure would significantly reduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions, must be designed to comply with the following additional requirements: (1) It must perform its intended function under any foreseeable operating condition. (2) When systems and associated components are considered separately and in relation to other systems— (i) The occurrence of any failure condition that would prevent the continued safe flight and landing of the airplane must be extremely improbable; and (ii) The occurrence of any other failure condition that would significantly reduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions must be improbable. From § 23.1431 Electronic Equipment: (a) In showing compliance with §23.1309(b)(1) and (2) with respect to radio and electronic equipment and their installations, critical environmental conditions must be considered. From the Final Rule: §23.1309 If the design of the airplane includes equipment, systems, and installations that perform functions whose failure condition would prevent continued safe flight and landing of the airplane, the occurrence of each failure condition must be extremely improbable. In addition, on airplanes designed for any type of operation not limited to VFR, the systems whose failure conditions would significantly reduce the airplane’s capability, or the ability of the crew, to cope with the adverse operating conditions must be improbable. It was recognized that any failure would reduce the airplane’s or crew’s capability by some degree, but that reduction may not be of the degree that would make operation of the airplane potentially catastrophic. The intent of § 23.1309(b) is to require that systems whose failure would be catastrophic or potentially catastrophic be evaluated using the latest available analysis techniques. Although future airplane designs limited to visual flight rules operations are not likely to include equipment, systems, and installations whose failure condition would prevent continued safe flight and landing of the airplane, the applicability of this requirement, as discussed above, will provide airworthiness standards if the applicant elects to include such systems in the airplane’s design. Therefore, the applicability of this requirement hardware accomplishment summary not been revised as suggested by this commenter §23.1431 This proposes to amend §23.1431 to revise the current rule that addresses radio equipment only by including other electronic equipment that is installed in a Part 23 airplane. Two comments were received. One commenter asks for a definition of the words, “critical environmental conditions” used in proposed §23.1431(a). Critical environmental conditions are those environmental conditions under which a piece of equipment will not perform its intended function. By including this requirement, conditions that may be critical to the operation of a piece of equipment must be considered. Consideration of such conditions would include, but not be limited to, temperature extremes, vibration levels, and humidity. From the NPRM: §23.1309 A new §23.1309(b) is proposed which will require a detailed examination of each item of equipment, system, and installation. This examination is to determine whether a failure would affect the airplane’s continued safe flight and landing. Each item of equipment, each system, and each installation identified by such an examination as being critical to the safe operation of the airplane would be required to meet additional requirements. This will permit the approval of more advanced systems that were not envisioned when §23.1309 was added to Part 23, without the need for special conditions. §23.1431 This proposal would include electronic equipment that is being installed in Part 23 airplanes as well as radio equipment. When the existing regulation was adopted, radio equipment was the primary electronic equipment installed. For standardization in the application of federal aviation administration requirements, this proposal is consistent with §25.1431(a) and (c). §23.1309(b)(1) and (2) that are referenced are the proposed regulations in Notice 5, Small Airplane Airworthiness Review Program. Hazard Scenario Model: Hazard coupled with Linking Mechanism = Bad Outcome Hazard: Failure or malfunction of highly complex safety-critical equipment which could prevent continued safe flight/landing. Linking Mechanism: The complexity of such items and equipment precludes performance of only a bottoms-up failure mode & effects analysis type analysis; top-down functional decomposition is required as well to properly allocate safety requirements to items and equipment. Bad Outcome: Loss/malfunction of item/equipment, leading to crash. Risk Control Criteria This is defined in § 23.1309(b)(1)(2). Additionally, §23.1431(a) requires that critical environmental conditions be considered, that is, it is not sufficient to consider only failures which could occur within the established environmental limits of the aircraft. Acceptable Risk Criteria Acceptable quantitative risk criteria are provided by the regulation and AC 23.1309-1, System Safety Analysis and Assessment for Part 23 Airplanes. Additionally, qualitative risk criteria (design rigor requirements expressed as Development Assurance Levels, or DAL) are imposed by AC 23.1309-1, as well as system specific ACs. Design organizations consider safety aspects of each design through consideration of § 23.1309. Draft Advisory Circular AC_AMJ 25.1309 provides a methodical and systematic manner that ensures this process and its findings are visible and readily assimilated. Figure E-2 illustrates a systematic approach to safety assessments used throughout industry today without the guidance of additional short messaging service regulation. Pursuant to § 23.1309(b), the design of each item of equipment, system, and installation is examined separately and in relationship to other airplane systems and installations to determine if the airplane depends on its function for continued safe flight and landing. For each system reviewed, the failure conditions are identified and classified. All relevant engineering organizations are involved in this process. This identification and classification may be done by conducting a functional hazard assessment. These actions correspond to “Hazard Assessment” and “Risk Assessment” in Figure E-1 (below the horizontal dashed line, right-hand column). The analysis would be conducted to produce the data which is agreed to by the certification authority as being acceptable to show compliance. The analyses and conclusions of multiple safety assessments would be assessed to ensure compliance with the requirements for all aircraft level failure conditions. The design organization would then choose the means to be used to determine compliance with § 23.1309(b), whether through qualitative measures, quantitative measures, or both. This data is then used to prepare compliance statements, establish certification maintenance requirements, airworthiness limitations and flight manual requirements at the product level, thus defining type design. Simple systems and systems with failure effects classified as no greater than “Major” rtca document (“document order”) not require quantitative assessment to satisfactorily show compliance with the requirements of § 23.1309. A qualitative analysis relying on experienced engineering judgment, service history, or operational experience is sufficient. For Major failure conditions, a functional Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) or Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) may be required for complex systems. Figure E-3 below (taken from AC 23-1309) lists the qualitative probability requirements for each failure condition classification. For failure conditions classified as “Hazardous” or “Catastrophic,” quantitative analysis is generally required to supplement qualitative analysis. Failure rate data is assigned to events at the lowest fault tree analysis event or failure mode & effects analysis level that can be substantiated. Figure E-3 below lists the allowable quantitative probabilities for each failure condition classification per part 23 airplane class. In addition to qualitative and quantitative requirements, Figure E-3 lists the Development Assurance Levels (DAL) for each failure condition classification per part 23 airplane class. These DALs are intended to specify a level of development rigor pursuant to AC 20-115B, RTCA, Inc., Document RTCA/DO-178B, and AC 20-152, RTCA, Inc., Document RTCA/DO-254, Design Assurance Guidance for Airborne Electronic Hardware (“Safety Objective Defined,” Figure E-1 above the horizontal dashed line). Compliance with such standards enables, with regard to design and certification of the product or article, a conclusion of “Safety Objective Met” (Figure E-1). The basic safety risk management requirements of an short messaging service are clearly integrated into the abovementioned part 23 regulations that drive applicants to design safe products as part of the current process required by § 21.21. The creation of a new safety management regulation in place of applicable airworthiness standards would not contribute materially to the level of safety over that realized by using the existing system for designing and certifying products.