Title: Left Engine Failure and Subsequent Depressurization Southwest Airlines Flight 1380 Boeing 737-7H4, N772SW Philadelphia, Pennsylvania April 17, 2018 Author(s): National Transportation Safety Board Category: Report Tags: Accident, Report, Boeing, Philadelphia, Southwest, Airlines Abstract: This report discusses the April 17, 2018, accident involving a Boeing 737-7H4, N772SW, operated by Southwest Airlines as flight 1380, that experienced a failure of its left CFM International CFM56-7B turbofan engine while climbing through flight level 320 en route to the flight’s assigned cruise altitude (the flight had departed from LaGuardia Airport, Queens, New York, about 30 minutes earlier). Portions of the left engine inlet and fan cowl separated from the airplane; one fan cowl fragment impacted the left-side fuselage near a cabin window, and the window departed the airplane, which resulted in a rapid depressurization. As a result of the engine failure, the flight crew conducted an emergency descent and diverted to Philadelphia International Airport (PHL), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The airplane landed safely at preliminary hazard list about 17 minutes after the engine failure occurred. Of the 144 passengers and five crewmembers aboard the airplane, one passenger received fatal injuries, and eight passengers received minor injuries. Safety issues identified in this report include the need to ensure the structural integrity of the fan cowl on Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes after a fan-blade-out event involving CFM56 7B engines, the need to determine whether other airframe/engine combinations have any critical fan blade impact locations and how an impact at those locations could affect nacelle components, the need to emphasize the importance of having flight attendants secured in a jumpseat during emergency landings, and the need to mitigate hazards to passengers affected by an in-flight loss of seating capacity. As a result of this investigation, the National Transportation Safety Board hardware accomplishment summary made five new safety recommendations to the Federal Aviation Administration and one new recommendation to Southwest Airlines and the European Aviation Safety Agency. Abbreviations AC advisory circular airworthiness directive airworthiness directive automated external defibrillator automated external defibrillator above ground level above ground level auxiliary power unit auxiliary power unit aircraft rescue and firefighting aircraft rescue and firefighting automated surface observing system automated surface observing system air traffic control aerospace information report traffic control BEA Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses pour la Sécurité de l’Aviation Civile BNA Nashville International Airport CDT Central Daylight time code of federal regulations Code of Federal Regulations cockpit voice recorder cockpit voice recorder directorate generale of civil aviation Direction Générale de L’Aviation Civile european aviation safety agency European Aviation Safety Agency ECI eddy current inspection ESN engine serial number federal aviation administration Federal Aviation Administration FBO fan blade out flight data recorder flight data recorder FPI fluorescent penetrant inspection GE General Electric LGA LaGuardia Airport LOE line operational evaluation LPT low-pressure turbine MDT Harrisburg International Airport NG next generation nm nautical mile notice of proposed rulemaking notice of proposed rulemaking national transportation safety board National Transportation Safety Board process assurance public address preliminary hazard list Philadelphia International Airport PNS Pensacola International Airport PTI Propulsion Technologies International QRC quick reference card quick reference handbook quick reference handbook SB service bulletin SEM scanning electron microscope SWA Southwest Airlines UTAS universal time coordinate Aerospace Systems HPT high-pressure turbine high pressure compressor high-pressure compressor william p. hobby airport William P. Hobby Airport VMO maximum operating speed Executive Summary On April 17, 2018, at about 1103 Eastern daylight time, Southwest Airlines (SWA) flight 1380, a Boeing 737-7H4, N772SW, experienced a left engine failure while climbing through flight level 320 en route to the flight’s assigned cruise altitude. The flight had departed from LaGuardia Airport, Queens, New York, about 30 minutes earlier. As a result of the engine failure, the flight crew conducted an emergency descent and diverted to Philadelphia International Airport (PHL), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Portions of the left engine inlet and fan cowl separated from the airplane, and fragments from the inlet and fan cowl struck the left wing, the left-side fuselage, and the left horizontal stabilizer. One fan cowl fragment impacted the left-side fuselage near a cabin window, and the window departed the airplane, which resulted in a rapid depressurization. The airplane landed safely at preliminary hazard list about 17 minutes after the engine failure occurred. Of the 144 passengers and five crewmembers aboard the airplane, one passenger received fatal injuries, and eight passengers received minor injuries. The airplane was substantially damaged. The regularly scheduled domestic passenger flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121, with a destination in Dallas Love Field, Dallas, Texas. The airplane was equipped with two CFM International CFM56-7B24 turbofan engines. The CFM56-7B engine hardware accomplishment summary 24 fan blades installed in the fan disk. The left engine failure occurred when one of the fan blades fractured at its root (referred to as a fan-blade-out [FBO] event). The fan blade fractured due to a low-cycle fatigue crack that initiated in the dovetail (part of the blade root), which remained within a slot of the fan disk. The separated fan blade impacted the engine fan case and fractured into multiple fragments. Some of the fan blade fragments traveled forward of the engine and into the inlet. In addition, the fan blade’s impact with the fan case caused the fan case to deform locally over a short period of time. This deformation traveled both around and forward/aft of the fan case. After reaching the airplane structure (the inlet attach ring secured to the engine fan case A1 flange), the deformation generated large loads that resulted in local damage to the inlet. The forward-traveling fan blade fragments and the deformation compromised the structural integrity of the inlet, causing portions of the inlet to depart the airplane. The impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case also imparted significant loads into the fan cowl (also part of the nacelle) through the radial restraint fitting, which was located at the bottom of the inboard fan cowl. These loads caused cracks to form in the fan cowl skin and frames near the radial restraint fitting. This damage then propagated forward and aft, severing the three latch assemblies that joined the inboard and outboard halves of the fan cowl, which caused large portions of both fan cowl halves to separate and depart the airplane. One fan cowl part that was recovered after the accident was the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper. The left side of the fuselage near the location of the missing cabin window (row 14) had impact damage and witness marks that were consistent with the size and shape of the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper and surrounding structure. During the accident sequence, the fan blade fragments traveling forward of the fan case had a trajectory angle that was greater than that observed during the CFM56-7B engine FBO containment certification tests. Also, the inlet damage caused by the forward-traveling fan blade fragments was greater than that observed during the engine FBO containment certification tests. It accounted for in Boeing’s 737-700 certification analyses (which used the state-of-the-art analytical modeling tools that were available at the time). In addition, FBO-generated loads were transmitted to the fan cowl through the radial restraint fitting, which was not accounted for in the fan cowl’s design, and the stresses in the fan cowl were greater than those calculated in the certification analyses. Since the time that the CFM56-7B engine and the Boeing 737-700 airplane were certificated (in December 1996 and December 1997, respectively), new technologies and analytical methods have been developed that will better predict the interaction of the engine and airframe during an FBO event and the response of the inlet, fan cowl, and associated airplane structures. Metallurgical examinations of the fractured fan blade found that the crack had likely been initiated before the fan blade set’s last overhaul in October 2012. At that time, the overhaul process included a fluorescent penetrant inspection (FPI) to detect cracks; however, the crack was not detected for unknown reasons. After an August 2016 FBO event involving another SWA 737-700 airplane equipped with CFM56-7B engines, which landed safely at Pensacola International Airport, Pensacola, Florida, CFM developed an eddy current inspection (ECI) procedure to be performed at overhaul (in addition to the FPI that was already required). An ECI hardware accomplishment summary a higher sensitivity than an FPI and can detect cracks at or near the surface (unlike an FPI, which can only detect surface cracks). The crack on the fan blade involved in the preliminary hazard list accident was also not detected during the on-wing fan blade visual inspections (subsequent to the overhaul) that were conducted as part of fan blade relubrications, which CFM recommended to maintain the fan blade loads within the predicted range and prevent wear on the fan disk and the fan blade dovetail coating. After the August 2016 FBO event, CFM developed an on-wing ultrasonic inspection technique that could be performed at the time of fan blade relubrication. ECIs at the time of overhaul or ultrasonic inspections at the time of fan blade relubrication identified 15 blade cracks on separate engines (as of August 2019). Probable Cause The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) determined that the probable cause of this accident was a low-cycle fatigue crack in the dovetail of fan blade No. 13, which resulted in the fan blade separating in flight and impacting the engine fan case at a location that was critical to the structural integrity and performance of the fan cowl structure. This impact light-emitting diode to the in-flight separation of fan cowl components, including the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper, which struck the fuselage near a cabin window and caused the window to depart from the airplane, the cabin to rapidly depressurize, and the passenger fatality. Safety Issues The national transportation safety board identified the following safety issues as a result of this accident investigation: •Need to ensure the structural integrity of the fan cowl on Boeing 737 next-generation (NG)-series airplanes after an FBO event involving CFM56-7B engines. The separated fan blade impacted the fan case at the six o’clock position (at the bottom of the engine). During the CFM56-7B engine FBO containment certification tests, the CFM-selected fan blade release position was at noon. Boeing’s postaccident analyses found that the fan cowl structure is more sensitive to failure when a separated fan blade impacts the fan case near the six o’clock position because of the proximity of this fan blade impact location to the radial restraint fitting (at the bottom of the inboard fan cowl). The interaction of the fan case, radial restraint fitting, and fan cowl during an FBO event must be well understood to preclude a failure of the fan cowl structure on Boeing 737NG-series airplanes. •Need to determine whether other airframe/engine combinations have any critical fan blade impact locations and how an impact at those locations could affect nacelle components. This investigation revealed the concept of a critical location for an FBO impact and its effect on the structural integrity of the nacelle and its components. Other engine/airframe combinations may also be sensitive to the location of an FBO impact and have unintended load paths and/or loads that are greater than those accounted for in structural analyses. No Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulation under 14 code of federal regulations Part 25, Airworthiness Standards: Transport Category Airplanes, currently requires manufacturers, as part of the design of the nacelle, to account for critical FBO impact locations in all engine operating conditions. The corresponding European Aviation Safety Agency regulations also rtca document (“document order”) not include this requirement. •Need to emphasize the importance of having flight attendants secured in a jumpseat during emergency landings. Although the flight attendants were aware of the imminent landing, none was in her assigned jumpseat in preparation for the landing. Instead, all three flight attendants were seated on the cabin floor, contrary to the SWA flight attendant manual procedures that required flight attendants to occupy their assigned jumpseats during a planned emergency landing. One of the flight attendants who was stationed in the forward cabin reported that she did not have time to return to her jumpseat; the other flight attendant assigned to the forward cabin static air temperature on the floor in the aft galley. Thus, the forward dual-position flight attendant jumpseat was unoccupied during the landing. The flight attendant assigned to the aft cabin also static air temperature on the floor in the aft galley because her jumpseat was occupied by a passenger from row 14 (who had relocated to the aft cabin so that the injured passenger could receive medical care) and an SWA company employee. If an emergency evacuation was needed, the flight attendants’ ability to rapidly evacuate the airplane could have been hindered because they were not in a position to open their assigned exits. •Need to mitigate hazards to passengers affected by an in-flight loss of seating capacity. The accident flight was full, with no open cabin seats remaining, and the flight attendants needed to reseat two passengers from row 14. Both passengers went to the aft galley; one static air temperature on the flight attendant's aft jumpseat, and the other static air temperature on the cabin floor. The SWA flight attendant manual provided information in several sections about reseating passengers, but none of the situations were similar to that aboard the accident flight, and the manual did not discuss any actions to take if no seats were available for a passenger who needed to be reseated. The NTSB’s review of federal aviation administration regulations, advisory circulars, and its Flight Standards Information Management System did not identify any specific guidance addressing options for reseating passengers when no additional passenger seats are available. Such guidance would help aerospace information report carriers implement procedures to mitigate hazards to passengers resulting from an in-flight loss of seating capacity. Findings •None of the following were factors in this accident: (1) flight crew qualifications, which were in accordance with US regulations; (2) flight crew medical conditions; (3) the airworthiness of the airplane before the left engine failure occurred; and (4) Southwest Airlines’ maintenance of the airplane. •The low-cycle fatigue crack in the fan blade dovetail was initiated because of higher-than-expected dovetail stresses under normal operating loads, and this crack was most likely not detectable during the fluorescent penetrant inspection at the time of the fan blade set’s last overhaul and subsequent visual inspections at the time of fan blade relubrications. •The requirement to perform an eddy current inspection at the time of fan blade overhaul and an ultrasonic inspection at the time of blade relubrication should enable cracked fan blades in CFM56-7B engines to be detected and removed from service before the cracks reach a critical size and the blades fracture. •The fan blade fragments that traveled forward of the fan case, along with the displacement wave created by the fan blade’s impact with the fan case, caused damage that compromised the structural integrity of the inlet and caused portions of the inlet to depart from the airplane. •Portions of the fan cowl departed the airplane because (1) the impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case imparted significant loads into the fan cowl through the radial restraint fitting and (2) the associated stresses in the fan cowl structure exceeded the residual strength of the fan cowl, causing its failure. •The impact of the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper with the fuselage near the cabin window adjacent to seat 14A caused the airplane's window to depart, the rapid depressurization of the cabin, and the passenger fatality. •This accident demonstrated the susceptibility of the fan cowl installed on Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes to a fan-blade-out impact location near the radial restraint fitting and the effects of such an impact on the structural integrity of the fan cowl. •Given the results of CFM’s engine fan-blade-out (FBO) containment certification tests and Boeing’s subsequent structural analyses of the effects of an FBO event on the airframe, the post-FBO events that occurred during this accident could not have been predicted. •The structural analysis modeling tools that currently exist to analyze a fan-blade-out (FBO) event and predict the subsequent engine and airframe damage will allow airplane manufacturers to better understand the interaction of the engine and airframe during an FBO event and the response of the inlet, fan cowl, and associated structures in the airplane’s normal operating envelope. •Performing required checklists according to standard operating procedures is critical to safe flight operations. However, given the emergency situation aboard this flight, the flight crew’s performance of most, but not all, of the items on the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation non-normal checklist and the nonperformance of the three other relevant non-normal checklists allowed the crew to appropriately balance the procedural requirement of executing checklists with the high workload associated with maintaining airplane control and accomplishing a safe and timely descent and landing. •The flight crew’s decision to land at Philadelphia International Airport was appropriate given the airplane’s location at the time of the emergency, the circumstances of the emergency, and the airport’s multiple runways and aircraft rescue and firefighting capabilities. •Although not a factor in the outcome of this accident, the flight attendants should have been properly restrained in their assigned jumpseats in case an emergency evacuation after landing was necessary. •Federal Aviation Administration guidance addressing options for reseating passengers if an in-flight loss of seating capacity were to occur would help aerospace information report carriers implement procedures to address this situation. Recommendations To the Federal Aviation Administration •Require Boeing to determine the critical fan blade impact location(s) on the CFM56-7B engine fan case and redesign the fan cowl structure on all Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes to ensure the structural integrity of the fan cowl after a fan-blade-out event. (A-19-17) •Once the actions requested in Safety Recommendation A-19-17 are completed, Boeing will be required to install the redesigned fan cowl structure on new-production 737 next-generation-series airplanes. (A-19-18) •Once the actions requested in Safety Recommendation A-19-17 are completed, operators of Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes will be required to retrofit their airplanes with the redesigned fan cowl structure. (A-19-19) •Expand the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 25 and 33 certification requirements to mandate that airplane and engine manufacturers work collaboratively to (1) analyze all critical fan blade impact locations for all engine operating conditions, the resulting fan blade fragmentation, and the effects of the fan-blade-out-generated loads on the nacelle structure and (2) develop a method to ensure that the analysis findings are fully accounted for in the design of the nacelle structure and its components. (A-19-20) •Develop and issue guidance on ways that aerospace information report carriers can mitigate hazards to passengers affected by an in-flight loss of seating capacity. (A-19-21) To Southwest Airlines •Include the lessons learned from the accident involving Southwest Airlines flight 1380 in initial and recurrent flight attendant training, emphasizing the importance of being secured in a jumpseat during emergency landings. (A-19-22) To the European Aviation Safety Agency •Expand your certification requirements for transport-category airplanes and aircraft engines to mandate that airplane and engine manufacturers work collaboratively to (1) analyze all critical fan blade impact locations for all engine operating conditions, the resulting fan blade fragmentation, and the effects of the fan-blade-out-generated loads on the nacelle structure and (2) develop a method to ensure that the analysis findings are fully accounted for in the design of the nacelle structure and its components. (A-19-23) 1. Factual Information 1.1 History of Flight On April 17, 2018, at about 1103 Eastern daylight time, Southwest Airlines (SWA) flight 1380, a Boeing 737-7H4, N772SW, experienced a left engine failure while climbing through flight level 320 en route to the flight’s assigned cruise altitude. The flight had departed from LaGuardia Airport (LGA), Queens, New York, about 30 minutes earlier. As a result of the engine failure, the flight crew conducted an emergency descent and diverted to Philadelphia International Airport (PHL), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Portions of the left engine inlet and fan cowl separated from the airplane, and fragments from the inlet and fan cowl struck the left wing, the left-side fuselage, and the left horizontal stabilizer. One fan cowl fragment impacted the left-side fuselage near a cabin window, and the window departed the airplane, which resulted in a rapid depressurization. The airplane landed safely at preliminary hazard list about 17 minutes after the engine failure occurred. Of the 144 passengers and five crewmembers aboard the airplane, one passenger received fatal injuries, and eight passengers received minor injuries. The airplane was substantially damaged. The regularly scheduled domestic passenger flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121, with a destination in Dallas Love Field, Dallas, Texas. The accident flight occurred on the second day of a 4-day pairing for the captain and the first officer. On the day of the accident, the flight crew reported for duty at 0600 central daylight time (CDT) and operated a flight in the accident airplane that departed from Nashville International Airport (BNA), Nashville, Tennessee, at 0644 CDT and arrived at LGA at 0928. The next flight leg was the accident flight. The airplane pushed back from the gate at 1027 and took off at 1043. The first officer was the pilot flying, and the captain was the pilot monitoring. Cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR) data indicated that the taxi and takeoff were uneventful. At 1057:36, the New York Center controller handling the flight instructed the flight crew to climb to and maintain flight level 380. The climb to flight level 380 was uneventful until shortly after the airplane passed through flight level 320 at 1103:33. At that time, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the sound of increased background noise. flight data recorder data showed that, immediately afterward, the No. 1 (left) engine’s fan and core speeds decreased, and the engine’s vibration parameters increased. During postaccident interviews, the flight crewmembers reported that they heard a loud “bang” and felt significant airplane vibration. flight data recorder data also showed that the airplane immediately began an uncommanded roll to the left. At 1103:39, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the sound of the cabin altitude warning horn, indicating that the cabin altitude had increased to more than 10,000 ft, and the flight data recorder recorded that the cabin altitude had exceeded 10,000 ft. The SWA B737NG Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) states that pilots should don oxygen masks immediately upon receiving a cabin altitude warning. Starting at 1103:42, the cockpit voice recorder recorded unintelligible cockpit communications for about 2 minutes. flight data recorder data showed that the airplane’s uncommanded roll to the left reached a maximum of 41.3° at 1103:44. The first officer, as the pilot flying, began to roll the airplane back to wings level; about 6 seconds later, the airplane’s left roll was 5.1°, at which point the roll attitude was generally back under the pilots’ control. flight data recorder data also showed that, at 1103:58, power in the right engine was reduced to idle, which was consistent with the start of an emergency descent. Power in the left engine was also reduced to idle at that time. The left engine fuel cutoff parameter transitioned from run to cutoff at 1104:09, and the left engine began to windmill (that is, the engine fan rotated freely due to aerospace information report loads from the oncoming airflow) during the remainder of the descent. At 1104:21, the New York Center controller who was handling the flight issued a clearance direct to a waypoint along the flight route. At 1104:28, the controller repeated the instruction; 10 seconds later, he tried again to reach the flight crew. At 1104:50, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the controller stating, “Southwest thirteen eighty if you're trying to get me all I hear is static.” One second earlier (1104:49), the cockpit voice recorder had begun recording sounds consistent with the flight crew’s use of oxygen masks. During postaccident interviews, the flight crewmembers reported some initial confusion about the position of the switch that allowed the crewmembers to communicate through a microphone in their oxygen mask. At 1104:54 and 1105:02, the captain transmitted to the controller, “Southwest thirteen eighty hardware accomplishment summary an engine fire descending,” and “we’re single engine descending have fire in number one” (the left engine), respectively. (The airplane was descending through an altitude of 28,500 and 28,000 ft at those times.) The controller then asked the flight crewmembers which airport they wanted to divert to, and the captain responded, “give us a vector for your closest.” According to the aerospace information report traffic control (ATC) transcript, the controller suggested Harrisburg International Airport (MDT), Middletown, Pennsylvania, and the air traffic control and cockpit voice recorder transcripts indicated that the controller issued a heading of 250°. The captain acknowledged the heading instruction and stated, “we’re looking at ah Philly.” While the discussion between the captain and the controller was occurring, the flight data recorder recorded the airplane’s peak descent rate, 5,228 ft/min, between 1105:08 and 1105:24. At 1105:32 and 1105:38, the captain asked the first officer, “have you got the aircraft?”; the cockpit voice recorder did not record a verbal response from the first officer. The captain then stated that she was “going to go around through” the company’s B737NG QRH. At 1105:52, the controller cleared the airplane direct to PHL. (About 2.5 minutes elapsed between the time of the engine failure and the clearance to divert to PHL.) The first officer acknowledged the clearance, and the captain made a public address (PA) announcement to inform the cabin crew and passengers that the airplane would be diverting to PHL. At 1106:55, the controller stated, “so there’s a fire you’re single engine ‘cause of fire?” The captain responded, “actually we’re no fire now but we are single engine,” and the controller acknowledged the captain’s response. The controller then cleared the airplane to descend to and maintain 11,000 ft, and the captain acknowledged the clearance. At 1107:51, the controller asked whether there should be “anything standing by on the ground,” and the captain replied, “tell ‘em roll the trucks it’s on the…engine number one captain’s side.” The controller acknowledged this transmission. At 1108:12, after a transfer of communications to another center sector, the captain declared an emergency and indicated that the airplane was descending through an altitude of 17,000 ft. flight data recorder data showed that, from the time of the engine failure to the time that the airplane reached 17,000 ft, the airplane’s airspeed was between 280 and 300 knots. At 1109:30, the captain stated, “tell you what I’m gonna take it,” and the flight data recorder control column force data indicated that the captain was at the airplane’s controls and had become the pilot flying. At that time, the airplane was at an altitude of 13,600 ft. The first officer assumed the duties of the pilot monitoring and, at 1109:52, began the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist. At 1110:14, the center controller instructed the flight crew to contact the Philadelphia approach controller, and the first officer acknowledged this instruction. Shortly afterward, the approach controller instructed the flight crew to descend to and maintain 6,000 ft, which the first officer acknowledged. The controller then asked the crew about the remaining fuel and the number of occupants on board, and the first officer replied that there were 149 occupants and 5 hours of fuel remaining. At 1111:37, the controller instructed the flight crew to fly a heading of 090°, and the first officer acknowledged the heading instruction. At 1111:45, the first officer asked the captain, “we’re gonna need a few minutes right? To run a couple checklists? Is that right?” The captain responded, “nope just keep going,” and the first officer stated, “okay.” At 1111:53, the Philadelphia approach controller asked the flight crew for the nature of the emergency; the captain stated, “engine severe damage, engine failure.” At 1112:28, the first officer stated that he had removed his oxygen mask because the airplane had descended below 10,000 ft. Afterward, the first officer told the captain that he would remove her oxygen mask. The captain thanked the first officer and then stated that he “might have to take the aircraft for just a minute.” At 1113:05, the first officer stated, “I’ll take it,” and the captain indicated, 7 seconds later, that he should “hold it for just a second.” Between 1113:19 and 1113:26, the controller instructed the flight crew to descend to and maintain 4,000 ft, the captain stated that she had resumed control of the airplane (1113:22), and the first officer acknowledged the controller’s instruction. At 1113:34, the first officer stated, “check your speed,” and the captain stated that she was trying to slow down the airplane “on purpose.” flight data recorder data showed that the airplane’s airspeed had decreased from 272 to 232 knots during a 40-second period. During a postaccident interview, the captain stated that she flew slower than the Emergency Descent checklist speed (VMO, the maximum operating speed) to reduce the severity of the airframe vibration. The approach controller asked the flight crewmembers if they planned to “go right in” or needed “extended final,” and the captain replied, “extended final.” At 1113:51, the first officer commented to the captain that “we got a couple [of] checklists to run.” Three seconds later, the first officer indicated that he wanted to speak with the flight attendants to find out the status of the cabin. The captain agreed and stated, “I’ve got everything here.” At 1114:14, the controller asked whether the flight crew wanted a short or long final approach, and the captain replied that a long final approach would be needed. (During a postaccident interview, the captain stated that she wanted a long final approach to allow time to accomplish checklists.) The controller stated, “I’m gonna let you drive until you tell me you wanna turn [onto the] base [leg],” and indicated that the flight crew should expect “at least a twenty five mile final.” At 1114:37. the captain responded that “twenty [miles] is good…we may need shorter here in a moment” and asked about the landing runway. The controller then indicated that the airplane would be landing on runway 27L. While the conversation between the captain and the controller was occurring, the first officer was attempting to reach the flight attendants. The cockpit voice recorder transcript indicated that, 12 seconds after placing an interphone call to the flight attendants, the first officer told the captain, at 1114:36, that there was no reply. During a postaccident interview, one of the flight attendants (identified as flight attendant B) stated that she heard the interphone acoustic warning and answered the call, but she could not hear anything because the cabin was too loud. At 1115:00, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the sound of a acoustic warning followed by the captain’s statement to the first officer indicating that he should talk with the flight attendants. The cockpit voice recorder then recorded a conversation between the first officer and one of the flight attendants (identified as flight attendant C) from 1115:04 to 1115:29. The flight attendant stated, “we got…a window open and somebody is out the window.” The first officer asked if everyone else was buckled in their seats, and the flight attendant stated that “everyone [was] still in their seats” and “we have been helpin’ her [the injured passenger] get in. I don’t know what her condition is but the window is completely out.” Section 1.7.4 provides detailed information about the events in the cabin after the window departed the airplane and the efforts to help the passenger, who occupied seat 14A. During his discussion with the flight attendant, the first officer also communicated with the captain, stating “slow down to two hundred ten knots now” at 1115:24. The captain then told the controller that the airplane was going to “need to slow down a bit.” The controller responded, “speed is your discretion. Maintain…any altitude above three thousand feet and you let me know when you want to turn [onto the] base [leg].” The captain acknowledged the altitude instruction. At 1115:47, the first officer informed the captain about the injured passenger. At 1115:54, the captain instructed the first officer to perform the rest of the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist, and the cockpit voice recorder recorded the first officer performing items from the checklist. During a postaccident interview, the captain stated that, although she had requested a long final approach, she decided to expedite the approach (as indicated by her statement, “let’s get it turned in,” at 1115:54) when she learned about the injured passenger. At 1116:15, the captain stated that she wanted to use 5° of flaps for the landing because she did not know how controllable the airplane would be. During a postaccident interview, the captain reported that she was experiencing “lots of drag” on the flight controls during the descent. The captain also reported that, to determine the approach speed with 5° of flaps, she considered the 160-knot airspeed for flaps 15 (the recommended landing flap configuration for a single-engine landing, according to the B737NG Aircraft Operating Manual) and added 20 knots to attain an approach airspeed of 180 knots. (The SWA 737NG quick reference handbook did not provide guidance for a single-engine landing with a flap setting of 5°.) At 1116:31, the captain told the controller that she wanted to start turning the airplane inbound for the final approach. The controller replied, “just start turning southbound…start looking for the airport it’s off to your right and slightly behind you there.” The controller also referenced a preceding SWA 737 airplane that was on a 4-mile final approach. Between 1117:04 and 1117:30, the captain requested that emergency medical personnel meet the airplane on the runway because of a “hole” in the airplane in which a passenger “went out.” At 1117:37, the captain told the controller that the airport was in sight. Afterward, the controller cleared the flight for a visual approach to runway 27L and instructed the flight crew to contact the preliminary hazard list air traffic control tower; the captain acknowledged the clearance and instruction. At 1118:59, the tower controller stated that the airplane was cleared to land on runway 27L and that the wind was from 280° at 19 knots with gusts to 25 knots, and the first officer acknowledged the clearance. At 1119:56, the captain called for the Before Landing checklist, and the cockpit voice recorder recorded the flight crew performing the checklist. Starting at 1120:13, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the flight attendants commanding “heads down, stay down” repeatedly to the passengers in the cabin. flight data recorder data (the weight-on-wheels sensor) showed that the airplane landed at 1120:30 and that the spoilers extended immediately afterward. At 1120:31, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the first officer announcing “extended.” At 1120:32 (about 17 minutes after the engine failure occurred), the cockpit voice recorder recorded a sound consistent with nose gear touchdown. The airplane landed at a speed of about 171 knots and with the flaps at 5°. Reverse thrust was used on the right engine. 1.1.1 Events After Landing The airplane exited the runway via a high-speed taxiway and stopped on the taxiway near a fire truck. At 1121:43, the captain made a process assurance announcement to advise the passengers that a fire truck was approaching the left side of the airplane and that they should remain in their seats and listen to the flight attendants. The cockpit voice recorder transcript indicated that the captain made initial contact with aircraft rescue and firefighting (ARFF) personnel at 1122:26. Nine seconds later, the captain relayed that the left side of the airplane was damaged. At 1122:41, aircraft rescue and firefighting personnel informed the captain that “we’re examining [the] damage now” and that there were “no signs of any smoke or fire from the outside.” As part of that transmission, aircraft rescue and firefighting asked the captain whether there were injuries inside the airplane; the captain responded that there were injuries that needed to be addressed as soon as possible. Between 1123:57 and 1124:39, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the flight crew performing the shutdown checklist. When the checklist was completed, the captain indicated that she wanted to check the cabin; 10 seconds later, the cockpit voice recorder recorded sounds of the captain entering the cabin. (She returned to the cockpit by 1126:01.) At 1125:20, aircraft rescue and firefighting stated that buses were on the way (to transport the passengers and crewmembers to the terminal) and that paramedics would come aboard the airplane to assess any injured passengers. (ARFF repeated this information at 1125:39; afterward, the first officer acknowledged the information.) At 1126:20, one of the flight attendants gave the command to disarm the doors. At 1130:20, the cockpit voice recorder recorded one of the flight crewmembers stating that emergency medical personnel would be coming into the airplane and that the aisle should be clear. After this announcement, the flight crew notified aircraft rescue and firefighting that only one passenger needed immediate medical attention. At 1136:27, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the captain stating the following: “hey I got a quick question. where is the cockpit recorder circuit breaker?” She also stated, “oh I found it, I found it. flight recorder. I’m gonna pull all three…okay. I just pulled all three.” (This conversation was consistent with a cell phone call.) At 1138:34, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the captain briefing passengers on the status of the deplaning process. At 1142:14, the cockpit voice recorder recorded a sound consistent with a first responder vehicle siren. At 1151:55, the cockpit voice recorder recorded sounds consistent with the initiation of passenger deplaning, which occurred via airstairs outside of the airplane. About 1236, the cockpit voice recorder recorded sounds consistent with the flight crew leaving the airplane. 1.2 Personnel Information 1.2.1 The Captain The captain, age 56, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a multiengine land rating. She received a type rating for the Boeing 737 on July 28, 1993. The captain also held a first-class medical certificate dated December 12, 2017, with a limitation that required her to possess glasses for near vision. At the time of the accident, the captain had been employed by SWA for 24 years. She flew as a Boeing 737 first officer before upgrading to captain in September 2000. Before her employment with SWA, the captain flew the A-7 and F-18 airplanes for the US Navy. Also, during the summer before joining SWA, she flew aircraft that provided forest fire support. According to SWA records and information that the captain provided, she had accumulated about 11,715 hours of total flight experience, including 10,513 hours in the 737, of which 7,118 hours were as a 737 pilot-in-command. She had flown 123, 43, and 8 hours in the 90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours, respectively, before the accident. The captain’s last line check occurred on May 3, 2017, and her last recurrent ground training occurred on May 2, 2017. The captain had no previous accident or incident history, and company training records showed that she had not failed any pilot checkrides. 72-Hour History On April 14, 2018, the captain was off duty and awoke about 0800 CDT. She went to sleep about 0000 CDT on April 15. She awoke that day about 0800 CDT; commuted to William P. Hobby Airport (HOU), Houston, Texas (where she was based), for her flight the next day; and went to sleep about 2045 CDT. The captain awoke about 0500 CDT on April 16 and reported for duty at 0730 CDT. She and the accident first officer operated three flights, and their duty day ended at BNA at 2017 CDT. The captain went to sleep by 2130 CDT. The captain awoke at 0500 CDT on April 17 and reported for duty at 0600 CDT. Postaccident Testing The captain underwent the required postaccident alcohol and drug screening tests. All results were negative. 1.2.2 The First Officer The first officer, age 44, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a multiengine land rating. He received a type rating for the Boeing 737 on March 17, 2007. The first officer also held a first-class medical certificate dated January 22, 2018, with no limitations. At the time of the accident, the first officer had been employed by SWA for 10 years. Before his employment with SWA, the first officer flew T-37, T-1, and E-3 airborne warning and control system airplanes for the US aerospace information report Force. According to SWA records and information that the first officer provided, he had accumulated about 9,508 hours of total flight experience, including 6,927 hours in the 737. He had flown 202, 70, and 8 hours in the 90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours, respectively, before the accident. The first officer’s last line check occurred on November 8, 2017, and his last recurrent ground training occurred on November 7, 2017. The first officer had no previous accident or incident history, and company training records showed that he had not failed any pilot checkrides. 72-Hour History The first officer was off duty on April 14, 2018. The times that the first officer went to sleep on April 14 and awoke on April 15 are not known; he went to sleep on April 15 about 2130 CDT. The time that the first officer awoke on April 16 is also not known, but the first officer stated that he slept well and felt rested when he reported for duty at william p. hobby airport (where he was based) at 0730 CDT. The captain and the first officer flew three flights and ended their duty day at BNA at 2017 CDT. The first officer went to sleep shortly after 2100 CDT. On April 17, he awoke at 0500 CDT and reported for duty at 0600 CDT. Postaccident Testing The first officer underwent the required postaccident alcohol and drug screening tests. All results were negative. 1.2.3 The Flight Attendants The accident flight was operated with three SWA flight attendants. Flight attendant A was assigned to the forward entry door position. She completed initial new hire training in May 2016, and her last recurrent training occurred in September 2017. Flight attendant B was assigned to the aft left galley door position. She completed initial new hire training at the beginning of March 2018 (about 6.5 weeks before the accident occurred). Flight attendant C was assigned to the forward galley door position. She completed initial new hire training in June 2014, and her last recurrent training occurred in October 2017. 1.3 Airplane Information The Boeing Airplane Company delivered N772SW new to SWA on July 7, 2000. The 737-7H4 is a Boeing 737-700 next-generation (NG) airplane model. (The NG-series of Boeing 737 airplanes—the 737-600, -700, -800, and -900—originated in 1991 as derivatives of the 737-100 airplane, which was certificated in the late 1960s.) The airplane had accumulated 63,521 total flight hours and 37,021 total flight cycles at the time of the accident. The dispatch release for the accident flight showed no deferred maintenance items. The airplane was equipped with two CFM International CFM56-7B24 turbofan engines, with one engine mounted under each wing. CFM International was established in 1974 as a partnership between General Electric Aviation (GE), a US manufacturer, and Safran Aircraft Engines (Safran), a French manufacturer formerly known as Snecma. (GE manufactured the CF6 engine, and Snecma manufactured the M56 engine; those engine designations were combined to form the new company and engine names.) The left (No. 1) engine, which was manufactured in December 1997 and installed on N772SW on November 29, 2012, had accumulated a total of 67,040 flight hours and 40,569 flight cycles. The left engine was last overhauled on November 14, 2012, at the GE Celma facility in Petrópolis, Brazil. The left engine accumulated 18,088 hours of flight time and 10,712 flight cycles between the time of the overhaul and the accident. The right (No. 2) engine, which was manufactured in June 2005 and installed on N772SW on September 24, 2009, had accumulated a total of 56,448 flight hours and 33,020 flight cycles. The right engine’s last overhaul before the accident occurred on September 4, 2009, and the engine accumulated 28,954 hours of flight time and 17,201 flight cycles between the time of the overhaul and the accident. During the accident flight, a fan blade in the left engine fractured at its root (referred to as a fan-blade-out [FBO] event), with the dovetail (part of the blade root) remaining within a slot of the fan disk. The separated fan blade then impacted the engine fan case and fractured into multiple fragments. Some of the fan blade fragments traveled forward of the engine and into the inlet, and portions of the inlet and the fan cowl departed the airplane. (The inlet and the fan cowl are part of the nacelle, which is the airplane structure that houses the engine.) A fan cowl fragment contacted the fuselage by a cabin window, and the window departed the airplane, which resulted in a rapid depressurization of the cabin. The engine, inlet, and fan cowl are discussed in sections 1.3.1 through 1.3.3, respectively, and are shown in figure 1. Information about the cabin window is discussed in section 1.7.1. 1.3.1 Engine The CFM56-7B is a high-bypass, dual-rotor, axial-flow turbofan engine. A single-stage high-pressure turbine (HPT) drives the nine-stage high-pressure compressor (HPC). A four-stage low-pressure turbine (LPT) drives the engine fan and low-pressure compressor (also referred to as the booster). The engine rotates clockwise (aft looking forward). The engine consists of three major assemblies: the fan, engine core, and LPT, which are shown as part of figure 3 later in this section. GE is responsible for manufacturing the HPC, combustion chamber, and HPT (collectively referred to as the engine core). Safran is responsible for manufacturing the engine fan and LPT. Both companies assemble the engines; those assembled by GE are identified by an even engine serial number (ESN) prefix (for example, 874), and those assembled by Safran are identified by an odd ESN prefix (for example, 875). The ESN of the accident engine, 875134, showed that Safran assembled the engine. The fan and booster assembly comprises the front and aft spinner cones, fan disk, fan blades, booster rotor, booster vanes, and associated hardware. The fan disk, which is secured to the booster, hardware accomplishment summary 24 fan blade slots. In accordance with the instructions in Boeing’s 737-600/700/800/900 Aircraft Maintenance Manual, the fan blades are numbered sequentially (1 through 24) in the counterclockwise direction (forward looking aft). The fan blades are made of a titanium alloy (known as Ti-6-4), and the dovetail part of the fan blade, which slides into the fan disk, hardware accomplishment summary a copper-nickel-indium coating for wear protection. Before the application of the fan blade coating, the entire blade, including the dovetail, is shot-peened to increase the fatigue strength of the material and reduce surface tensile stresses that can lead to cracking. (Shot-peening is a process that adds a compressive residual stress surface layer to material, and residual stress is the stress that is present in solid material in the absence of external forces.) Each CFM56-7B fan blade hardware accomplishment summary a chord (width) of about 11 inches at its widest point. The nominal weight of each fan blade is about 10.83 pounds. The fan blades in the accident engine were manufactured in 2000 as part number 340-001-026-0; the part number was changed to 340-001-038-0 after the incorporation of a September 2012 CFM service bulletin (SB) to reidentify some in-service fan blades. (No other modifications to the fan blades were made as a result of this SB.) A spacer is installed under each fan blade root primarily to limit fan blade radial (outward) movement. The spacer also ensures that axial (longitudinal) loads can be transmitted to the fan blade axial retention feature during an FBO event. A shim is installed over each fan blade dovetail to prevent fretting (wear) of the fan disk pressure faces and reduce the amount of stress on the fan blade dovetail and the fan disk pressure faces. The fan disk and spacers are manufactured from a titanium alloy (Ti-6-4). The shims are manufactured from a nickel-chromium-iron alloy (alloy 718). A platform is installed on both sides of each fan blade to provide a smooth aerodynamic flow path between the blades. The platforms are manufactured from an aluminum alloy. Figure 2 shows the fan assembly. The fan frame assembly is the main forward support for the installation of the engine to the airframe and includes the fan frame, the fan case, and the fan outlet guide vanes. The fan case, which is made of an aluminum alloy, was designed to provide fan blade radial containment if an FBO event were to occur and transmit FBO loads to the fan frame and the inlet (part of the airframe). Although the fan case provides the primary FBO radial containment protection, the inlet, which is attached to the fan case A1 flange, provides additional FBO protection. Figure 3 shows a cross-section of the engine and airframe components. All 24 fan blades from the accident engine had the same service history; they operated as a complete set, and no blades within the set were replaced since their introduction into service in another SWA engine (March 2001). The fan blades were last overhauled in October 2012 by Propulsion Technologies International (PTI) in Miramar, Florida (and were subsequently sent back to the GE Celma facility for installation in the accident engine). At that time, the overhaul process included conducting visual and dimensional inspections, stripping the dovetail coating from the blades to perform an ultra-high-sensitivity fluorescent penetrant inspection (FPI), shot-peening the entire blade, and reapplying the dovetail coating. When the overhaul was performed, the fan blade set had accumulated 37,382 hours and 21,924 cycles since new. Postaccident review of the PTI work orders related to the October 2012 overhaul of the accident fan blade set showed that all fan blades were processed according to the repair instructions and that all fan blades passed the final quality check and thus did not require any rework. In addition, review of the PTI metallurgical testing records showed that no anomalies had been noted for any of the coating requirements, including surface condition, microstructure, bond strength, thickness, and hardness. At the time of the accident, the fan blade set had accumulated 55,471 hours and 32,636 cycles since new and 18,088 hours and 10,712 cycles since the time of the overhaul. The CFM56-7B fan blade was not certified as a life-limited part. To maintain the fan blade loads within the predicted range and prevent wear on the fan disk and the fan blade dovetail coating, CFM recommended repetitive on-wing relubrications of the dovetails. As part of the relubrication, the fan blades are visually inspected to assess the blade coating condition and identify any airfoil damage and crack indications. At the time of the fan blades’ last overhaul in October 2012, the CFM-recommended fan blade dovetail relubrication interval was every 3,000 cycles or 5,000 hours, whichever continuing airworthines management exposition first. At the time of the SWA flight 1380 accident, the recommended relubrication interval was every 1,500 to 3,000 cycles. Between November 29, 2012 (the date that the accident engine was installed on the SWA flight 1380 airplane) and April 17, 2018 (the date of the SWA flight 1380 accident), the dovetails on the fan blade set were relubricated seven times. The number of cycles between each relubrication did not exceed the CFM-recommended relubrication interval at the time, and the fan blades had accumulated 1,704 cycles since the last relubrication. In October 2018, CFM further reduced the relubrication interval to every 1,600 cycles; this change appeared immediately in the electronic version of Boeing’s 737-600/-700/-800/-900/-900ER maintenance planning document. 1.3.2 Inlet The inlet is an aerodynamic fairing assembly that is attached to the engine at the fan case A1 flange with 24 bolted assemblies (fasteners). The inlet directs smooth uninterrupted airflow into the engine fan and core sections and is an external aerodynamic pressure surface that directs the airflow over the fan cowl and other nacelle components. The inlet was developed between 1994 and 1997 with a design configuration and materials similar to those of the 737-300, a previously certificated Boeing airplane model. Boeing created the design specifications for the inlet. universal time coordinate Aerospace Systems (UTAS) was the inlet manufacturer. The inlet consists of the inlet lip, inner and outer barrels, forward and aft bulkheads, and attach ring. The inlet lip is an aerodynamic surface to reduce airplane drag. The inner and outer aft ends of the inlet lip are attached to the forward bulkhead. The inlet lip and the forward bulkhead are collectively referred to as the D-duct assembly. The inner and outer barrels are concentric structures connected to the forward and aft bulkheads. The inner barrel consists of an acoustic honeycomb core; an aluminum containment shield, which is bonded over an area comprising about the aft 11 inches of the inner barrel; two bolted splice plates at the three and nine o’clock positions, which is where the two halves of the inner barrel join together; perforate skin; and back skin. The outer barrel comprises three panels with two support frames. The attach ring is located at the aft end of the inlet and is secured to the engine fan case A1 flange. The interface between the inlet attach ring and the engine fan case A1 flange is considered to be critical to the inlet’s FBO capability because engine loads are reacted at that interface. The aft bulkhead and the inner barrel are also secured to the attach ring. Figure 4 shows a cross-section of the inlet. The inlet lip, outer barrel, and attach ring are made of an aluminum alloy. The forward and aft bulkheads are made of a titanium alloy. The inner barrel is primarily made of an aluminum alloy. The 24 bolted assemblies that attach the inlet to the fan case include a crushable spacer that is designed to absorb energy and compress during an FBO event. Aerodynamic and inertia loads on the outer barrel are transmitted to the inner barrel through the forward and aft bulkheads. Loads on the aft bulkhead are transmitted to the interface between the inlet attach ring and the fan case A1 flange. The inlet on the accident airplane’s left engine was installed on February 2, 2018, and remained in that position until the accident. At the time of the accident, the inlet had accumulated 62,656 hours and 36,741 cycles since new. No major repairs were performed on the inlet after it was installed on the accident airplane. Before the inlet’s installation on the accident airplane, there were no significant repairs that would have affected the inlet’s structural integrity. 1.3.3 Fan Cowl The fan cowl is an aerodynamic fairing that encloses the engine fan case and engine accessories. The fan cowl extends from the aft end of the inlet to the forward end of the thrust reverser (which is also part of the engine nacelle). The forward edge of the fan cowl, which is supported by the inlet, hardware accomplishment summary four axial locators that interface with fittings on the inlet aft bulkhead assembly, and the aft edge of the fan cowl is supported by contact with the thrust reverser. Similar to the inlet, the fan cowl was developed between 1994 and 1997 with a design configuration and materials similar to those of the 737-300. Boeing created the design specifications for the fan cowl, and UTAS was the fan cowl manufacturer. The fan cowl is constructed in two halves with an outboard and inboard cowl. Each fan cowl half is attached to the pylon fan cowl support beam by three hinge fitting assemblies at the top and is joined together axially at the bottom (about the six o’clock position) by three latch assemblies, each of which comprises a latch hook and a latch keeper. A radial restraint fitting at the bottom of the fan cowl engages with a radial restraint bracket at the bottom of the engine fan case to help the fan cowl maintain its shape (due to the flat bottom of the nacelle and the asymmetric design of the fan cowl). Figure 5 shows the components for the fan cowl on the left engine. As shown in the figure, the latch hooks are located on the outboard cowl, and the latch keepers and radial restraint fitting are located on the inboard cowl. Figure 10 (in section 1.3.4.3) shows the radial restraint bracket from the accident engine fan case. The fan cowl skin and frame are made of an aluminum alloy, the fan cowl hinges are made of a titanium alloy, and the latch housings (for the latch hooks and latch keepers) are made of an aluminum alloy. Flight and ground loads carried by the fan cowl skins are transferred to the fan cowl support beam at the hinge interfaces. Radial loads are reacted at the radial restraint fitting (as well as at the inlet aft bulkhead and the fan cowl aft interface with the thrust reverser). Axial forward and aft loads are reacted at the four axial locators and the fan cowl hinges. The fan cowl on the accident airplane’s left engine was the original fan cowl delivered with the airplane. The fan cowl was inspected on March 30, 2018, as part of a general visual inspection of the engines and nacelles. This inspection is required every 560 flight cycles or 90 days, whichever comes first. In addition, the fan cowls are inspected as part of the airplane exterior general visual inspection conducted every 8 days; this inspection was performed 2 days before the accident. The National Transportation Safety Board’s (NTSB) review of SWA maintenance records for the fan cowl during the 10 years preceding the accident found no nonroutine items for the latch hooks or latch keepers; the records showed that only minor in-service repairs were performed. 1.3.4 Postaccident Examinations Postaccident examination of the airplane at preliminary hazard list found that the left fuselage, the left-wing leading edges and upper and lower surfaces, and the left horizontal stabilizer showed evidence of impact damage (surface scratching and skin gouging, tears, and penetrations) along with blue and red paint transfer. The following airplane parts were recovered near Bernville, Pennsylvania, which corresponded to the coordinates of the location where the FBO event occurred: •parts from the D-duct assembly (comprising the inlet lip and forward bulkhead), •parts of the inlet inner and outer barrels, •part of the inlet aft bulkhead, •parts of the outboard and inboard fan cowl sections, and •multiple small parts and paint chips. Sections 1.3.4.2 and 1.3.4.3 provide details about the recovered inlet and fan cowl parts. The fuselage skin below the passenger window near seat 14A exhibited evidence of impact damage (witness marks and a small puncture just below the window). The lower aft corner of the section of the inboard fan cowl that departed the airplane also exhibited evidence of impact damage. The lower aft corner edges of the inboard fan cowl section aligned with the fuselage witness marks, as shown in figure 6, indicating that the impact-damaged surfaces were similar. No windowpane fragments or window frame material were found inside the airplane or during the ground recovery of airplane debris. 1.3.4.1 Engine All but 1 of the 24 fan blades were found as installed (full length) in the fan disk; fan blade No. 13 had fractured at the root. A visual examination of the fractured blade’s dovetail, which remained installed in the fan disk, found features consistent with a fatigue crack that initiated on the convex side about 0.6 inch aft of the leading edge, as shown in figure 7. Two fragments from fan blade No. 13 were found at the bottom of the fan case between the fan blades and the fan outlet guide vanes. One fan blade fragment was part of the airfoil; the fragment was about 2 inches in length (spanwise), appeared to be full width (chordwise), and was twisted. The other fragment was the part of the blade root that matched with the dovetail that remained in the fan disk; the fragment was about 12 inches in length (spanwise) and appeared to be full width (chordwise). The total weight of the recovered fragments from fan blade No. 13, including the dovetail, was about 8.26 pounds, which was about 76% of the nominal weight of a fan blade (10.83 pounds). The remainder of fan blade No. 13, including the blade tip, was not recovered. The fan case exhibited three hard and distinctive impact marks, all of which were located near the six o’clock position and in line with the fan blade rotational plane. The fan case was breached (torn) at the location of one of the impacts, but no evidence indicating fan blade material pass-through was found. The fan blade hardware was removed, and an on-site ultrasonic inspection was performed on the full-length blades (Nos. 1 through 12 and 14 through 24) in accordance with CFM SB 72-1033 (see section 1.10.2.3). None of the blades showed indications of a crack. Afterward, all of the fan blades and their hardware (shims, platforms, and spacers) were sent to the NTSB’s Materials Laboratory in Washington, DC, for further examination and evaluation; those findings are discussed in section 1.8.1. 1.3.4.2 Inlet The inlet was fractured, and separated inlet pieces included the inlet lip, forward portion of the inner barrel, outer barrel skin, and forward and aft bulkheads. As shown in figure 8, almost all of the inner barrel forward of the containment shield separated circumferentially from the rest of the inlet; only a portion of the inner barrel back skin remained from the one to three o’clock positions and at the five o’clock position. The inner barrel separation location was about 17 inches forward of the fan case A1 flange. The inner barrel perforate skin was missing or torn in various locations around the inner barrel circumference. The two bolted inner barrel splice plates (where the two halves of the inner barrel join) were still present. The containment shield was intact with no penetrations, and all of the bolts that secured the containment shield to the inlet attach ring were present. The attach ring was intact and secured to the fan case A1 flange by each of the inlet-to-fan case bolted assemblies. All of the bolted assemblies were intact, and some of the crushable spacers were compressed. More than 90% of the inlet lip and forward bulkhead (D-duct assembly) was recovered in two halves that were about the same size. The assembly fractured at the three and nine o’clock positions, and the fracture surfaces had jagged tears. The upper part of the D-duct assembly exhibited three punctures. About 90% of the outer barrel, including the entire upper outer barrel, was recovered. About 10% of the inner barrel was recovered, including the portion from the four to seven o’clock positions (which remained attached to the D-duct assembly) and part of the inner barrel perforate skin and core (which remained attached to the forward bulkhead). After the on-scene examination, the inlet was sent to the UTAS facility in Chula Vista, California, for further evaluation. UTAS mounted the inlet in a fixture that simulated the airplane installation to observe the damage to the inlet. Traces of titanium were found on aluminum inlet components, including the containment shield (at the forward edge) and the outer barrel. The inner barrel assembly back skin was completely separated forward of the containment shield, which had fractures and deformations. No evidence of fatigue was found on the back skin and acoustic core. The inner barrel back skin fracture surfaces exhibited tension, shear, and/or tension overload with areas of outward shear-lip deformations and alternating-direction (inward and outward) shear-lip deformations. The available evidence did not specifically indicate whether the source of some inlet damage, including damage to the inner barrel back skin, was caused by forward-traveling fan blade fragments or engine rundown (that is, the engine fan rotor deceleration before windmilling begins, as further discussed in section 1.3.7.1). Thus, to better assess the amount of inner barrel back skin damage, estimates of both the minimum and maximum inner barrel back skin damage were developed (instead of a single damage estimate), and both estimates were expressed as the number of degrees around the circumference of the inlet (arc length). The amount of inner barrel back skin damage (before the inner barrel separated from the inlet) was determined by an evaluation of the fragment trajectories, a metallurgical analysis of the inner barrel back skin, and the presence of fan blade material transfer from the blade fragments to the inner and outer barrel. The inner barrel back skin damage (forward of the containment shield) that could be positively identified (either through visual observations or metallurgical analysis) as having been caused by forward-traveling fan blade fragments had an estimated airworthiness review certificate length that ranged from 70° to 180°. 1.3.4.3 Fan Cowl Almost all of the outboard (left) fan cowl was missing; only some small pieces remained attached to the pylon. The forward, middle, and aft hinges were present. The forward outboard hinge was attached to a small piece of the fan cowl panel, but the middle and aft outboard hinges were not attached to any fan cowl structure. The forward and middle outboard hinges appeared distorted. The inboard (right) fan cowl was substantially damaged, as shown in figure 9, and was rotated aft. The inboard fan cowl had fractured and was missing about one-half of its bottom portion from about the four to six o’clock positions. The upper cowl panel in the inboard fan cowl remained attached to the airplane via the forward, middle, and aft hinges. Most of the starter aerospace information report vent (located at the bottom of the fan cowl in line with the radial restraint fitting) was missing, and the attach flanges for the vent showed overstress fracture features. About 65% of the outboard fan cowl and 30% of the inboard fan cowl were recovered separately from the airplane. The recovered pieces showed multiple fractures in the circumferential stiffening frames and areas of missing paint, but those pieces showed no signs of through-hole penetrations. The forward and center latches (located on the outboard fan cowl) were recovered, but the aft latch was not recovered. A small section of the fan cowl structure was attached to the forward latch and fitting. Most of the forward lower portion of the panel for the outboard fan cowl was not recovered. The forward, center, and aft latch keepers (located on the inboard fan cowl) were recovered along with a small section of the fan cowl structure (on the center and aft latch keepers) and a long and narrow section of fan cowl structure (on the forward latch keeper). The aft lower cowl panel for the inboard fan cowl was not recovered. As with the inlet, the fan cowl was sent to the UTAS Chula Vista facility for further evaluation. UTAS mounted the fan cowl in the fixture that simulated the airplane installation. The recovered pieces of the outboard fan cowl were wired to the fan cowl hinges, which were attached to the fixture. The recovered pieces of the inboard fan cowl were wired to the fan cowl portion that remained attached to the airplane. The outboard and inboard fan cowls were, in general, distorted radially along their length. Multiple frame and panel/skin fracture features were consistent with tension, twisting, and buckling. In addition, the radial restraint bracket (located at the bottom of the engine fan case) showed significant damage at the locations where the bracket contacted the radial restraint fitting (attached to the inside of the inboard fan cowl). The bracket was deformed, its bushing flange was damaged, and a roller contact mark was observed, as shown in figure 10. The damage to the radial restraint bracket was caused by the disengagement of the radial restraint pin (an integral part of the radial restraint fitting) as it moved downward and forward relative to the bracket. 1.3.5 Certification of Engine and Airframe Components The CFM56-7B engine was jointly certificated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and its counterpart in France, the Direction Générale de L’Aviation Civile (DGAC). The federal aviation administration issued the type certificate for the engine model on December 17, 1996, and the certification basis was 14 code of federal regulations Part 33, Airworthiness Standards: Aircraft Engines (amendment levels 33-1 through 33-15). The directorate generale of civil aviation certificated the engine in December 1996 under Certificat de Type Moteur M21, which was superseded by European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) type certificate EASA.E.004 in 2006. (In 2004, european aviation safety agency assumed responsibility for the certification of CFM engines.) There were no significant differences between the federal aviation administration and directorate generale of civil aviation certification requirements, and the engine met all requirements of both agencies. Because the engine was dual-certificated, the certification basis also included Joint Aviation Requirements JAR-E Change 8 (dated May 4, 1990). The Boeing 737-700 airplane was certificated on November 7, 1997. The certification basis was 14 code of federal regulations Part 25, Airworthiness Standards: Transport Category Airplanes. When the CFM56-7B engine and the Boeing 737-700 airplane were certificated, an FBO event was generally considered to have two major stages. The first stage was the failure event itself, during which fan blades and/or other internal engine debris could be released from the engine (addressed by Part 33). This stage included the failed engine’s impact loads, surge pressure loads, and rundown loads during the engine’s rapid deceleration and accounted for fan blade trajectories and energies, engine torque, engine thrust decay, and imbalance loads. The second stage was the effect that the failed engine could have on the airplane’s airframe, systems, and occupants, including the airplane’s ability to safely fly and land (addressed by Part 25). This stage, which is typically referred to as the “fly home” phase, accounted for the imbalance loads from a continuously windmilling engine and structural damage to the inlet. 1.3.5.1 Engine Certification Regulations Turbine engine fan blade containment requirements are found in Part 33 Subpart B, Design and Construction (section 33.19), and Subpart F, Block Tests; Turbine Aircraft Engines (section 33.94). The fan blade containment requirements in these sections were implemented in 1984 and are still in effect. Section 33.19, Durability, paragraph (a), states the following: “The design of the compressor and turbine rotor cases must provide for the containment of the damage from rotor blade failure.” Historically, this regulation hardware accomplishment summary meant that engine debris cannot penetrate and pass radially through the engine case but that debris can exit axially from the front or back of an engine. Section 33.19(a) also states that “energy levels [mass, trajectory, and velocity angles] and trajectories of fragments resulting from rotor blade failure that lie outside the compressor and turbine rotor cases must be defined.” Section 33.94, Blade Containment and Rotor Unbalance Tests, paragraphs (a) and (a)(1), address requirements to preclude damage resulting from an FBO event. These paragraphs state that engine tests must demonstrate the following: The engine is capable of containing damage without catching fire and without failure of its mounting attachments when operated for at least 15 seconds, unless the resulting engine damage induces a self shutdown after…failure of the most critical compressor or fan blade while operating at [the] maximum permissible r.p.m. federal aviation administration Advisory Circular (AC) 33-5, “Turbine Engine Rotor Blade Containment/Durability” was issued on June 18, 1990, to provide guidance on acceptable design and test methods for compliance with Part 33 requirements regarding turbine engine fan blade containment. According to the AC, “contained” was defined as “no fragments are released through the engine structure, but fragments may be ejected out of the engine aerospace information report inlet or exhaust.” Also, the AC defined “engine structure” as the “structure surrounding the main rotors and extending from the forward-most case flange through the rear-most flange, as defined by the type design.” In addition, the AC provided the engine configuration, conditions, and acceptable results for fan blade containment tests. 1.3.5.2 Tests for Engine Certification To meet Part 33 requirements and obtain data for Boeing (as the airframe manufacturer) to use to meet Part 25 certification requirements (discussed in the next section), CFM performed eight development FBO rig tests and two engine FBO containment certification tests. The purposes of the FBO tests were to (1) understand the fan blade fragmentation and kinematics (fragment energy levels and trajectories) after blade separation, (2) determine the fan case containment capability (radial containment), (3) define the loads and displacements from the initial impact and the resulting engine imbalance, (4) calculate the speed and weight of any ejected fragments (forward containment), and (5) demonstrate the proposed production hardware configuration. Each rig test had a specific set of objectives and used various fan blade and fan case configurations. The first four FBO rig tests were designed to define the fan blade fragmentation and kinematics for fan case radial containment capability, fan blade axial retention, and fan blade interaction. The fourth FBO rig test included a full set of production-representative fan blades, a production-representative fan case, and a combination of actual and production-representative engine accessories. Also included in this test was a Boeing production-representative inlet, which had the same size, shape, and stiffness of the intended production inlet at that time. The production-representative inlet included crushable spacers but did not include a containment shield. FBO rig test 4, which was conducted in August 1995, revealed that the separated fan blade fractured into five pieces with the blade tip panel traveling forward of the fan case and into the inlet at an estimated 10° to 15° helix angle (where the fragment crossed the A1 flange). Figure 11 shows a general example of a helix angle. The blade tip panel spiraled around the inlet and then penetrated the inlet inner and outer barrels. The inner barrel penetration was about 26° forward of the fan blade rotational plane, which was beyond the ± 15° fragment spread angle (impact area) referenced in AC 20-128 (see section 1.3.5.3) as a practical design consideration to minimize the hazards of uncontained fragments. The test also revealed a small penetration hole in the fan case. Further, the test revealed that the fan blade axial retention feature allowed some blades to slide forward. Given the results of FBO rig test 4, CFM began to redesign the fan case to prevent through-hole penetrations and the fan blade axial retention feature to prevent the blade movement observed during the test. Also, Boeing instructed UTAS to design a containment shield that would prevent a fan blade fragment from penetrating the inlet structure. CFM conducted an engine FBO containment certification test in April 1996. The purpose of the engine FBO containment certification test was to demonstrate that (1) the engine case would be capable of containing damage (no radial pass-through of engine debris into the structure) without catching fire and without failure of the engine mounting attachments when the engine was operated for at least 15 seconds after the FBO event and (2) the engine could be successfully shut down (or the damage could result in a self-shutdown of the engine). The test configuration included the redesigned fan case and a production-representative inlet that had a containment shield. A fan cowl was not included in the test configuration, per standard industry practice, because the fan cowl would have precluded the fan case and its components from being observed during the test. Although an inlet (an airframe part) was included in the test, the purpose of the test was to validate and certify engine hardware. The fan blade release point is not specified by regulation, so the release point is selected by the engine manufacturer based on factors including the configuration of the test stand and the location of the mounted lights and recording devices. For the CFM56-7B certification tests, CFM selected the twelve o’clock position as the fan blade release point. According to CFM, the test results showed that, after the initial fan blade release, the fan case withstood the impact with no penetrations, the engine did not catch fire, the engine mounting hardware did not fail, and the engine was able to be shut down. The test results also showed that the inlet remained attached to the engine and that no fan blade fragments penetrated the containment shield. Afterward, five consecutive fan blades moved forward out of the fan disk, indicating that the blades’ axial retention capability had failed. The fan case and the inlet were subsequently damaged by pass-through penetrations, and the inlet was further damaged due to missing inner and outer barrel material and the severing (360° circumferentially) of the aft bulkhead-to-attach ring joint. Boeing and UTAS determined that, even with the inlet damage, a redesign of the inlet was not necessary and additional inlet testing was not required because (1) the inlet remained attached to the engine; (2) the inlet withstood the initial FBO impact, the surge pressure loads, and the rundown loads; and (3) the containment shield performed appropriately during the initial fan blade release. CFM redesigned the fan blade axial retention feature based on the results of this certification test and conducted four additional rig tests to ensure that the redesigned feature would prevent fan blade axial movement. CFM conducted a second engine FBO containment certification test in December 1996. Because the inlet was not part of the configuration for the second certification test, an aerodynamic bellmouth with a similar weight, stiffness, and flow-path shape as a production-representative inlet was used for the test. The second engine FBO certification test revealed fan blade fragmentation that was similar to that observed during the previous certification test and demonstrated that the fan blade axial retention feature had been successfully redesigned. Thus, the CFM56-7B engine met the fan blade containment certification requirements under Part 33. 1.3.5.3 Airplane Certification Regulations Numerous regulations under Part 25 applied to the inlet, the fan cowl, and other structures. These regulations included sections 25.571(e) and 25.629(d) (under Subpart C, Structure, through amendment level 25-77) and sections 25.901 and 25.903 (under Subpart E, Powerplant, through amendment level 25-77 and 25-73, respectively), which were intended to evaluate potential engine failures and their consequences to the airplane and ensure the airplane’s safe flight and landing. Section 25.571, Damage—Tolerance and Fatigue Evaluation of Structure, paragraph (e), stated the following: “the airplane must be capable of successfully completing a flight during which likely structural damage occurs” as a result of an uncontained fan blade impact, an uncontained engine failure, or an uncontained high-energy rotating machinery failure. This paragraph also stated that “the damaged structure must be able to withstand the static loads (considered as ultimate loads) which are reasonably expected to occur on the flight” and “if significant changes in structural stiffness or geometry, or both, follow from a structural failure or partial failure, the effect on damage tolerance must be further investigated.” Section 25.629, Aeroelastic Stability Requirements, paragraph (d), addressed failures, malfunctions, and adverse conditions that were required to be considered to show compliance with this section. These considerations included the “failure of any single element of the structure supporting any engine,” any damage, failure, or malfunction addressed by other relevant Part 25 sections, and “any other combination of failures, malfunctions, or adverse conditions not shown to be extremely improbable.” Section 25.901, Installation, paragraph (c), stated that, for each powerplant installation, “it must be established that no single failure or malfunction or probable combination of failures will jeopardize the safe operation of the airplane.” The paragraph also indicated that “the failure of structural elements need not be considered if the probability of such failures is extremely remote.” Section 25.903, Engines, paragraph (c), discussed control of engine rotation and stated that, for turbine engine installations, “the means for stopping the rotation of any engine [during flight] need be provided only where continued rotation could jeopardize the safety of the airplane.” Paragraph (d)(1) stated that, for turbine engine installations, “design precautions must be taken to minimize the hazards to the airplane in the event of an engine rotor failure.” On March 9, 1988, the federal aviation administration issued AC 20-128, “Design Considerations for Minimizing Hazards Caused by Uncontained Turbine Engine and Auxiliary Power Unit Rotor Failure,” to provide guidance on appropriate design precautions to minimize the hazards to the airplane in the event of an engine failure and acceptable methods for demonstrating compliance with section 25.903(d)(1). The AC stated the following: For the purposes of airplane evaluations in accordance with this AC, uncontained failure of a turbine engine is any failure which results in the escape of rotor fragments from the engine or auxiliary power unit [auxiliary power unit] that could result in a hazard. Rotor failures which are of a concern are those where released fragments have sufficient energy to create a hazard to the airplane. AC 20-128 defined various fragment spread angles (based on historic engine failure events) and the area of the airplane that would likely be impacted by uncontained engine fragments. The AC included a figure that further explained fragment spread angles. The figure showed that, for an FBO event, an airframe manufacturer was expected to assume that fan blade fragments would exit the engine at an angle that was ± 15° forward and aft from the center of the plane of rotation of an individual rotor stage initiating at the engine shaft centerline. The AC noted that airplane designs should “consider the likely damage extent caused by multiple smaller fragments or shrapnel in the ±15° spread angle areas” and that the “engine installer should consider the engine manufacturer’s data on fragment energies and trajectories in relation to the engine installation for the particular location on the airplane.” In addition, for the Boeing 737-600, -700, and -800 certification programs, the federal aviation administration issued Final Special Conditions 25-ANM-132, Boeing Model 737-600/-700/-800; High Intensity Radiated Fields (HIRF)/Engine Stoppage (62 Federal Register 50494), with an effective date of September 17, 1997. The special conditions were issued because the federal aviation administration found that Boeing 737-600, -700, and -800 airplanes would incorporate “novel and unusual design features when compared with the state of technology envisioned in the airworthiness standards for transport category airplanes.” Regarding the engine stoppage issue, the Federal Register noted that “the size, configuration, and failure modes of jet engines hardware accomplishment summary changed considerably from those envisioned in 14 code of federal regulations 25.361(b)” and that “the present generation of engines are sufficiently different and novel to justify issuance of a special condition to establish appropriate design standards.” The related special condition addressed the structural capability of the airplane to withstand engine torque loads imposed by a sudden engine stoppage due to a fan blade failure. The requirements of this special condition applied specifically to the engine mounts, pylon, and wing attachment structure to withstand loads associated with FBO and windmilling conditions. Boeing also applied the special condition requirements to the nacelle structure design to support the following provision in the company’s Specification Control Document for the inlet and fan cowl: Failure of an engine fan blade and subsequent damage shall not cause separation of the inlet or fan cowl from the engine or separation of components from the inlet cowl or fan cowl which would be a hazard to the aircraft. 1.3.5.4 Inlet and Fan Cowl Fan-Blade-Out Structural Analysis The Boeing 737-700 airplane structure, including the inlet and fan cowl, was designed and certificated according to Part 25 requirements and the special conditions discussed in the previous section. Notably, the inlet and fan cowl were designed to withstand an initial engine fan blade release and any resulting damage and ensure that the airplane would still be capable of safe flight and landing after an FBO event. CFM provided Boeing with the engine FBO containment certification test results so that Boeing and UTAS could analyze, as part of the airplane’s design and certification, how the inlet and fan cowl would respond to an FBO event. Also, CFM and Boeing jointly correlated the engine FBO containment certification test results and defined various FBO-related loads, including initial fan blade impact loads, surge loads, rundown loads, torque loads, imbalance loads, and windmilling loads. Boeing’s structural analysis of the inlet and fan cowl used the state-of-the-art methods that were available at that time. These methods involved using the NASTRAN finite element analysis program to generate a structural model of the airplane’s underwing propulsion system. The structural model was correlated with data from the engine FBO containment certification tests to determine structural loads that accounted for different fan blade release angles as well as the differences between the test stand used during the engine certification tests and a wing-mounted engine. Boeing’s structural model also analyzed the damage caused by the displacement wave, which occurs when an engine fan blade impacts the engine fan case during an FBO event and the fan case deforms locally over a short period of time. This deformation—referred to as the displacement wave—travels both circumferentially and forward and aft. When the displacement wave reaches the airplane structure (the inlet attach ring), the local displacements can generate large loads and deformations in the structure and result in local damage. The inlet damage caused by the displacement wave was determined based on observations from the engine FBO containment certification tests. Boeing also conducted a “fly home” analysis to account for the effects of reduced inlet stiffness due to the local damage that would occur from the fan blade fragmentation and the displacement wave. This analysis was used to support Boeing’s design intent for the inlet and fan cowl to remain attached to the engine during an FBO event and subsequent flight. 1.3.6 Accident Sequence 1.3.6.1 Overview Shortly after the airplane climbed through flight level 320, the No. 13 fan blade fractured at the blade root. The separated fan blade impacted the engine fan case near the six o’clock position and fractured into multiple fragments. Some of the fan blade fragments moved aft in the direction of the predominant airstream motion, and other blade fragments traveled forward into the inlet. Impact marks on the fan case and inlet, along with the recovered blade fragments, indicated that the fan blade tip and mid-span pieces exited the fan case and entered the inlet along a forward helical path. The fan blade fragments that traveled forward of the engine and into the inlet did so with sufficient mass and energy to significantly damage the inlet structure. The energy from the impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case resulted in local deformation of the fan case, which started a high-energy displacement wave that propagated circumferentially around the interface between the fan case and the inlet, causing additional damage to the inlet structure. The displacement of the engine fan case caused the aft bulkhead-to-attach ring fasteners to fail in shear and the outer barrel skin to become cantilevered from the inlet forward bulkhead. The damage to the inlet from the fan blade fragment penetrations and the displacement wave caused the inlet lip, forward and aft bulkheads, outer barrel, and portions of the inner barrel to depart the airplane. The containment shield, portions of the inner barrel that were attached to the containment shield, and the attach ring remained with the airplane. The fan blade’s impact with the fan case imparted significant loads into the fan cowl through the radial restraint bracket (attached to the fan case) and the radial restraint fitting and pin (attached near the bottom of the fan cowl). Cracks then initiated around the starter vent and fan cowl latches, which rapidly propagated, and aerospace information report loads caused the outboard and inboard fan cowl halves to separate from each other and open, resulting in portions of both fan cowl halves departing the airplane. Postaccident examination of the left side of the fuselage just forward of and below where a cabin window was missing had impact damage and witness marks that were consistent with the size and shape of the recovered inboard fan cowl structure that included the aft latch keeper (as shown in figure 6). The departure of the cabin window resulted in rapid depressurization. 1.3.6.2 Accident Events Compared with Certification Activities Some of the fragments from the accident fan blade were not recovered, but the recovered fan blade fragments showed that the mass of the fragments that exited the engine was likely similar to (and possibly greater than) the mass of the exiting fan blade fragments observed during the CFM56-7B engine FBO rig tests and containment certification tests. The likely exit trajectory of the fan blade fragments during the accident sequence (based on the observed damage to the fan case and the inlet) was between 15° and 30°, as shown in figure 12. (Figure 11 shows a general example of the forward spiral/helical pattern that fan blade fragments generally travel.) The engine FBO rig tests and the engine FBO containment certification tests provided evidence indicating that the fan blade tip exit trajectory would be 15°, which was used to design and certify the inlet. The exit trajectory for mid-span fragments was not defined during the engine certification tests because the fan blade tip was considered to have more energy. The resulting inlet damage was significantly greater than the damage that was observed during the engine FBO containment certification tests and analyzed as part of the inlet certification. For example, postaccident examination of the inlet inner barrel forward of the containment shield found penetrations that were consistent with fan blade fragment impact. This damage could not be observed after the initial fan blade release during the engine FBO containment certification tests. An inlet was included as part of the configuration for the first engine FBO containment certification test, and the inlet remained intact and attached to the fan case during the test. Modeling of the accident failure sequence (with Boeing’s progressive failure analysis simulation, which used techniques that were not available at the time of design and certification, as discussed in section 1.3.7.2), indicated that the damage to the inlet structure from fan blade fragment penetration and the displacement wave were sufficient to reduce the flight load-carrying capability of the inlet. The modeling also indicated that portions of the inlet most likely departed the airplane within 0.5 second after the fan blade release. The fan cowl was certified (by analysis) to withstand the loads from an initial fan blade release and any subsequent damage and remain attached to the airplane so that a safe landing could be accomplished. Modeling of the accident failure sequence (with Boeing’s progressive failure analysis simulation) showed that a fan blade impact with the fan case at or near the bottom of the fan cowl—which occurred during the accident FBO event—would present the greatest challenge to maintaining the fan cowl structural integrity because that location is where the latch assemblies and the radial restraint fitting are located. The modeling also indicated that portions of the fan cowl most likely departed the airplane about the same time or immediately before portions of the inlet departed 1.3.7 Postaccident Inlet and Fan Cowl Structural Analyses Industry knowledge and understanding of an FBO event hardware accomplishment summary progressed since the CFM56-7B engine and the Boeing 737-700 airplane were certificated in 1996 and 1997, respectively. New technologies and analytical methods were developed after that time to better understand and model an FBO event. For example, as part of this investigation, Boeing and CFM jointly developed new analytical models to predict, confirm, and correlate the behavior of the CFM56-7B engine and the 737-700 airplane structure during the accident FBO event. The new analytical models applied the most recent state-of-the-art methods, which had not been developed at the time that the CFM56-7B engine and the Boeing 737-700 airplane were certificated, to create (among other things) a detailed accident sequence of events using a progressive failure analysis. The methods enabled assessments of the effects of the fan blade impact, displacement wave (resulting from the impact of fan blade fragments with the fan case), the progressive failure of the inlet and the fan cowl, and the relationship between the inlet and fan cowl failure sequences. The analytical models were then correlated with the accident inlet and fan cowl damage, the CFM56-7B engine FBO containment certification test results, and flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder data from the accident and were used to determine the extent and timing of the damage to the inlet and fan cowl. Section 1.3.7.1 discusses the most recent knowledge regarding the FBO event phases. The predicted results of the analytical models appear in sections 1.3.7.2 (the inlet failure sequence) and 1.3.7.3 (the fan cowl failure sequence). 1.3.7.1 Fan-Blade-Out Event Phases As stated in section 1.3, an airplane structure is subjected to various loads during each of the four phases of an FBO event (the impact phase, the engine surge phase, the engine rundown phase, and the windmilling phase). Boeing’s knowledge about the effects of an FBO event on the airplane structure surrounding an engine hardware accomplishment summary evolved since the time of the 737-700 certification. Table 1 shows the timeline for a typical FBO event, and the discussion that follows the table describes the loads encountered during each FBO event phase. Impact - 0.00 to 0.02 second, Engine surge - 0.02 to 0.20 second, Engine rundown - 0.02 second to 2 seconds, Windmilling - 2 seconds to time of landing. The impact phase occurs during the two to three engine fan revolutions (within 0.02 second) after a fan blade release. Within this time, two independent events occur: the displacement wave (discussed in section 1.3.5.4) and the fan blade fragmentation. The engine surge phase occurs within 0.2 second after the fan blade release. During that time, the engine fan rotor becomes significantly imbalanced, causing the fan blades to rub heavily on the fan case, which results in a rapid deceleration of the entire low-pressure compressor system. This rapid deceleration, along with the disruption of aerospace information report flow from the missing fan blade, causes aerospace information report flow voids in the forward section of the engine core. The engine surge occurs as these voids cause the high-pressure aerospace information report flow in the aft section of the engine core to reverse direction and move forward to the lower pressure regions. This high-pressure aerospace information report flow continues forward and exits the front of the engine. Engine surge pressure loads affect both the fan case and the inlet. The engine rundown phase occurs within 2 seconds after the fan blade release. During that time, the fan rotor decelerates, and the airplane structure experiences significant vibratory loads from the fan rotor deceleration, fan blade rubbing forces, and the imbalanced engine. The windmilling phase occurs after the affected engine shuts down, the engine ceases to produce thrust, and the engine fan is driven by aerodynamic loads. At that point, the fan is still subject to random access memory aerospace information report pressure in flight. This pressure causes the imbalanced fan to freely rotate starting about 2 seconds after the fan blade release and lasting through the remainder of the flight. The continued unpowered rotation of the imbalanced fan rotor generates sustained low-level vibratory loads. 1.3.7.2 Inlet Failure Sequence Postaccident examination of the fan rotor, fan case, and inlet hardware indicated that impact damage from the fan blade fragments and the displacement wave could have contributed to the inlet failure. As a result, a progressive failure analysis of the inlet was conducted using finite element modeling methods. The analysis applied the damage from the displacement wave analysis, the damage from fan blade fragments, and the loads from the engine rundown. The predicted results of the progressive failure analysis were consistent with the inlet experiencing initial structural damage from the fan blade fragmentation and the displacement wave, which then propagated during the engine rundown and caused large portions of the inlet to depart the airplane. The analysis predicted, and the accident inlet hardware damage confirmed, that the aft bulkhead-to-attach ring joint failed 360° circumferentially due to fastener shearing from the displacement wave. Further, the inner barrel, which was initially damaged by the fan blade fragment impact, was further damaged from imbalance loads during the engine rundown. After the initial damage to the inlet, the critical remaining inlet structure was the 0.02-inch-thick inner barrel back skin just forward of the containment shield. Boeing included, in the progressive failure analysis, 150° of damage to the inner barrel perforate skin as well as 70° of damage through the inner barrel back skin forward of the containment shield. During the engine rundown, the inner barrel back skin (except for the splices at the three and nine o’clock positions) experienced a 360° circumferential failure, which caused the inner barrel to separate. Table 2 summarizes the inlet damage sequence based on the predicted inlet failure timeline. The numbers in the first column of the table correspond to those in figure 13, which follows the table. Table 2. Predicted inlet failure timeline. 1 - Fan blade impacts fan case - 0.005 seconds, 2 - 360° failure of aft bulkhead joint (due to displacement wave) - 0.021 seconds, 3 - 70° through-crack in inner barrel (due to blade fragments) - 0.025 seconds, 4 - 360° through-crack in inner barrel (due to rundown loads) - <0.500 seconds. Note: The first event occurred as part of the impact FBO phase, and the second through fourth events occurred as part of the engine rundown FBO phase. 1.3.7.3 Fan Cowl Failure Sequence Postaccident examination of the fan cowl hardware indicated that the effects of the fan blade impact could have contributed to the fan cowl failure. As a result, a progressive failure analysis of the fan cowl was also conducted using finite element modeling methods. This analysis applied the engine rundown loads resulting from the FBO event. The analysis also considered the effects of the inlet aft bulkhead damage from the displacement wave and the fan blade impact, which occurred earlier in the FBO event. The predicted results of this analysis were consistent with the observed damage in the fan cowl near the radial restraint fitting. This damage was caused by the fan blade impact transmitting loads through the radial restraint bracket on the fan case to the radial restraint fitting on the fan cowl. The transmitted impact loads and associated stresses caused cracks to form in the fan cowl skin and frames near the radial restraint fitting. This damage then propagated forward and aft, causing the inboard fan cowl skin to fracture around the middle and aft latch assemblies, which was quickly followed by the separation of the forward latch assembly. The fan cowl then opened; as a result, large portions of the lower part of each fan cowl half separated and departed the airplane. Table 3 summarizes the fan cowl damage sequence based on the predicted fan cowl failure timeline. The numbers in the first column of the table correspond to those in figure 14, which follows the table. Table 3. Predicted fan Cowl failure timeline. Sequence of events 1 - Radial restraint fitting transmits load into fan cowl (due to fan blade impact at six o’clock position), pin disengages, and multiple cracks in starter vent fitting initiate - 0.028 seconds. 2 - Cracks initiate at corners of starter vent - 0.038 seconds 3 - Cracks run in skin to aft edge of fan cowl - 0.062 seconds 4 - Load on aft latch fails skin between frames 4 and 3 - 0.070 seconds 5 - Skin crack runs from under frames 2 to 1 - 0.070 seconds 6 - Crack turns and runs aft of frame 1 - >0.070 seconds 7 - Load on forward latch fails latch fitting - >0.070 seconds Note: Frames 1 through 4 are shown in figure 14. All of the events occurred during the engine surge FBO phase. 1.4 Meteorological Information The automated surface observing system (ASOS) at preliminary hazard list reported the following conditions at 1054 (about 26 minutes before the airplane landed): wind from 290° at 18 knots with gusts to 27 knots, visibility 10 miles or greater, broken ceiling at 4,800 ft above ground level (agl) and broken clouds at 8,000 ft agl, temperature 45°F, dew point 25°F, and altimeter setting 29.75 inches of mercury. At 1154 (about 34 minutes after the airplane landed), the automated surface observing system reported the following conditions: wind from 270° at 16 knots with gusts to 21 knots, visibility 10 miles or greater, broken ceiling at 4,900 ft above ground level and overcast skies at 8,000 ft agl, temperature 45°F, dew point 25°F, and altimeter setting 29.73 inches of mercury. These observations indicated that visual flight rules conditions prevailed with a gusty surface wind from the west. The national transportation safety board reviewed pilot reports within 100 miles of the engine failure location, during the time period from about 2 hours before the accident to about 1 hour after the accident, and for altitudes above 10,000 ft. This review found no reports of turbulence or other significant weather conditions. No SIGMETs (Significant Meteorological Information) or center weather advisories were valid for the engine failure location at the time of the accident. An airmenâ€™s meteorological information (Airmen’s Meteorological Information) that was valid for the engine failure location at the time of the accident forecast moderate turbulence between flight levels 240 and 410 from 1045 to 1700. 1.5 Airport Information According to measurements that the national transportation safety board made using Google Earth, at the time of the engine failure, the airplane was 29 nautical miles (nm) from MDT and 57 nm from PHL. The federal aviation administration categorized MDT and preliminary hazard list as class I airports, which allowed them to serve scheduled aerospace information report carrier operations with aircraft that have 31 or more seats. MDT had one runway, 13/31, which was 10,001 ft long and 200 ft wide. preliminary hazard list had four runways; the longest runway, 9R/27L, was 12,000 ft long and 200 ft wide. (The accident airplane landed on runway 27L at PHL) The federal aviation administration also categorized the aircraft rescue and firefighting capabilities required for an airport, including the number of vehicles and amounts of water and firefighting chemicals required for the airport (as specified in 14 code of federal regulations 139.317, Aircraft Rescue and Firefighting: Equipment and Agents). Section 139.315, Aircraft Rescue and Firefighting: Index Determination, stated that an airport’s aircraft rescue and firefighting index was calculated based on the length of the aerospace information report carrier aircraft serviced by the airport and the average number of daily departures of aerospace information report carrier aircraft at the airport. The aircraft rescue and firefighting indexes ranged from A to E, with index E having the highest level of aircraft rescue and firefighting capabilities. preliminary hazard list was categorized as aircraft rescue and firefighting index E, which meant that the airport was required to have at least three vehicles with a minimum total quantity (among the three vehicles) of 6,000 gallons of water available for foam production along with additional firefighting chemical agents. MDT was categorized as aircraft rescue and firefighting index B, which meant that the airport was required to have one or two vehicles with a minimum total quantity (among the vehicles) of 1,500 gallons of water for foam production and the same firefighting chemical agents as an index E airport. 1.6 Flight Recorders The airplane was equipped with a Honeywell 6022 solid-state CVR. The cockpit voice recorder contains a two-channel digital audio recording of at least the last 2 hours of operation. One channel combines three audio panel sources—the captain, the first officer, and the observer—and the other channel is the cockpit area microphone. The cockpit voice recorder also contains a three-channel digital audio recording of the last 30 minutes of operation. The three channels are the individual audio panels for the captain, the first officer, and the observer. Each of the cockpit voice recorder channels contained either excellent- or good-quality audio information, and the data were extracted normally. A transcript was prepared of the recording, which began at 1052:57 (as the airplane was climbing to flight level 220) and ended at 1257:57 (after preliminary hazard list ground crew personnel repositioned the airplane). Appendix B contains the cockpit voice recorder transcript and descriptions of excellent- and good-quality audio. The airplane was also equipped with a Honeywell 4700 256 wps solid-state FDR. The recorder was in good condition, and the data were extracted normally. About 27 hours of operational data were retained on the recording medium, including about 53 minutes of data from the accident flight, from about 1030 to 1123. 1.7 Survival Aspects The airplane was configured with 143 passenger seats; 2 flight crew seats; 2 cockpit observer seats; and 4 flight attendant jumpseats on double retractable seat sets, with two flight attendant aft-facing jumpseats in the forward cabin and two flight attendant forward-facing jumpseats in the aft cabin. The airplane had six emergency exits—four floor-level door exits and two overwing window exits. The airplane had 24 rows of passenger seats on the left and right sides of the airplane, all of which had six passenger seats in two triple seat sets (ABC and DEF) except for row 11, which had two passenger seats (BC) located next to the left overwing exit. The fatally injured passenger was in seat 14A, which was located next to the cabin sidewall on the left side of the airplane. 1.7.1 Cabin Window The exterior cabin window by seat 14A measured 10 1/2 inches horizontally, 14 3/8 inches vertically, and 15 inches diagonally, as shown in figure 15. Ten spring clips surrounded the window frame. The window components also included an acrylic outer pane, an acrylic middle pane, and a silicon rubber seal between the panes. The outer and middle panes are structural components that carry the applied pressure load. Another window component, the inner pane, does not provide any pressurization capability. The interior cabin sidewall near the window had a fracture in the lower left corner that measured 2 5/8 inches in length, which is also shown in figure 15. The outer pane for the cabin windows was designed to meet the requirements of section 25.775, Windshields and Windows, paragraph (d). This regulation did not require the outer pane to withstand impact. The outer pane was certified by test in 1967. This accident was the first known complete passenger window loss event for the Boeing 737 fleet. According to Boeing, as of August 29, 2019, there were 33 outer pane fracture events in the 737 fleet and 16 such events in the 757 fleet (which hardware accomplishment summary the same passenger window part number as those for the 737 fleet); in all of these cases, the middle pane carried the applied pressure load. Boeing indicated that eight complete passenger window loss events occurred on airplanes in other company fleets; one event occurred on a 707 airplane, three events occurred on 727 airplanes, and four events occurred on 747 airplanes. Seven of the eight events occurred during cargo flights or aboard airplanes with empty passenger cabins with no injuries reported. The eighth event involved a 747 passenger window that departed the airplane at an altitude of 12,500 ft. No passenger was seated adjacent to the window, and no injuries were reported. 1.7.2 Cabin Pressurization Control System According to Boeing’s 737-600/700/800/900 Aircraft Maintenance Manual, the airplane’s aerospace information report conditioning packs provide aerospace information report to the cabin, and the pressurization control system maintains a safe cabin altitude at all airplane altitudes. As stated in section 1.1, for all pressurized flights, the cabin pressure altitude is determined by a pressure schedule that keeps the cabin altitude below 8,000 ft, which enables the flight crew to safely operate the airplane and protects the airplane occupants from the effects of hypoxia (oxygen starvation). The cabin pressure altitude increases as the airplane’s altitude increases; the cabin pressure altitude decreases as the airplane’s altitude decreases. The cabin altitude warning switch, located on the ceiling in the forward electronic equipment compartment, closes when the cabin altitude hardware accomplishment summary reached 10,000 ft pressure altitude ± 1,000 ft (9,000 to 11,000 ft). When the cabin altitude warning switch closes, an aural warning annunciates as “an intermittent beep alarm,” and the red CABIN ALTITUDE indicator lights on the captain’s and the first officer’s instrument panels illuminate. When the cabin altitude returns to a level that is below 10,000 ft, the cabin altitude warning switch opens, the indicator lights no longer illuminate, and the warning circuit resets. An altitude HORN CUTOUT switch on the cabin altitude panel is used to silence the alarm. For the accident flight, Boeing calculated that the cabin pressure would have been 5,773 ft as the airplane was climbing through an altitude of 32,600 ft. Among the information that the active cabin pressure controller logged after the engine failure was a 10,000-ft cabin altitude status message at 32,610 ft and a 13,500-ft cabin altitude status message at 32,554 ft, indicating that the cabin altitude was increasing as the airplane’s altitude was decreasing. The cabin pressure controller recorded the 10,000-ft cabin altitude status message when the cabin altitude was 10,661 ft. flight data recorder data showed that the cabin altitude warning parameter, which was sampled once per second, transitioned from no warning to warning between about 1103:38 and 1103:39. The cockpit voice recorder recorded the sound of the cabin altitude warning horn at 1103:39, which was about 6 seconds after sounds consistent with the engine failure were recorded on the CVR. The SWA Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization checklist showed that flight crewmembers were required to “don oxygen masks” if the cabin altitude warning horn sounded, and the company’s Emergency Descent checklist indicated that the “flight deck crew must use oxygen when cabin altitude is above 10,000 feet.” As stated in the next section, oxygen masks that provided supplemental oxygen to the flight attendants and the passengers were designed to deploy automatically when the cabin altitude reached 14,000 ft. The cabin altitude was 14,067 ft when the cabin pressure controller recorded the 13,500-ft cabin altitude status message. There is no parameter on the flight data recorder that directly records when the oxygen masks have deployed. 1.7.3 Supplemental Oxygen System A supplemental oxygen system was located above the flight attendant jumpseats and in the passenger service unit above each of the 48 seat sets on the airplane. The system was designed to provide oxygen to flight attendants and passengers if a depressurization event occurred. (The flight crew received supplemental oxygen from a different source.) The supplemental oxygen system in the passenger service unit consisted of an oxygen generator, a lanyard-based activation system, a distribution manifold with flexible mask supply tubing, and four masks. The four masks were designed to deploy when the oxygen mask compartment door opened, which occurred either automatically if the cabin altitude reached 14,000 ft or manually by the flight crew using a guarded switch on a cockpit overhead panel. Oxygen generation would begin after a passenger pulled a mask toward his/her face, causing the firing pin (connected to the lanyard) to release. Once the firing pin released, oxygen would flow through the tubing into a reservoir bag attached to the mask. The oxygen generators for all 48 seat sets were found activated. 1.7.4 Flight Attendant Postaccident Interviews At the time of the engine failure, flight attendant A was in the forward lavatory, flight attendant B was in the aft galley preparing for in-flight service, and flight attendant C was in the cabin near row 5. All three flight attendants heard a loud noise and felt the airplane shaking. Flight attendants A and C immediately went to the forward jumpseat (where they were stationed), static air temperature down, fastened their restraints, and put on oxygen masks that had deployed from above the jumpseat. Flight attendant A reported that debris was flying around in the cabin. Flight attendant B did not notice that the oxygen masks had deployed until a company employee, who was seated on the aft jumpseat, alerted her. She then static air temperature down on the aft jumpseat (where she was stationed) and put on an oxygen mask. The flight attendants then retrieved the two portable oxygen bottles in both the forward and aft entry stowage compartments. All three flight attendants donned portable oxygen bottles and moved into the cabin to check on the passengers. Flight attendant A noted that some passengers were wearing the mask over their mouth only (and not over both their nose and mouth as intended). Flight attendant A checked to ensure that each passenger was receiving oxygen and stopped at row 8 to help a female passenger with a lap child. Flight attendant C also walked through the cabin, telling passengers that they should breathe normally through their masks and that they were receiving oxygen even if the oxygen bag did not inflate. When flight attendant C reached row 14, she saw that the head, upper torso, and arms of the passenger seated in 14A had been pulled outside the airplane through the window. The passenger’s seat belt was buckled. Flight attendant C grabbed onto the passenger and, with assistance from flight attendant A, tried to bring the passenger back into the airplane, but flight attendant A reported that they could not get the passenger back into the airplane by themselves because of the pressure and the altitude. Two male passengers (in seats 8D and 13D) offered to help; they were able to pull the passenger back into the airplane and laid the injured passenger across seats 14ABC. Flight attendant B moved through the cabin to check on passengers. She did not notice any passengers whose masks were on incorrectly and was not aware of any masks that were not working. She did not know about the window breach until she saw the other flight attendants and some passengers attending to a passenger in row 14. She stated that the two other passengers from row 14 (seats 14B and 14C) had moved to the aft galley. When flight attendant B reached the aft galley, she heard the interphone acoustic warning and answered the phone but could not hear anything because of the “very loud” noise in the cabin. Flight attendant C went to the aft galley to use the interphone to alert the pilots about the condition of the passenger in seat 14A and make a process assurance announcement requesting medical assistance from any qualified passenger aboard. The passenger in seat 8D (a paramedic) and the passenger in seat 11C (a nurse) started CPR compressions on the injured passenger, and flight attendant A retrieved, from the forward right overhead bin, the automated external defibrillator (AED) and the fast response kit, which was secured to the automated external defibrillator and contained tools and supplies needed to use the automated external defibrillator as well as a CPR mask. Flight attendants B and C stated that they did not hear any announcement from the flight crew when the airplane reached a safe altitude to breathe without masks, but all three flight attendants recalled a flight crew announcement indicating that the airplane would be landing at PHL. Flight attendant A stated that she did not have time to return to her jumpseat for landing, so she static air temperature on the aisle floor near row 4 or 5, and seated passengers held her down. Flight attendant B static air temperature on the floor in the aft galley with seated passengers holding her down during landing. (The aft jumpseat, where flight attendant B was stationed, was occupied by a passenger from row 14 and the SWA company employee. The other passenger from row 14 was seated on the aft galley floor.) Flight attendant C also static air temperature on the floor in the aft galley during landing. (She did not indicate whether seated passengers held her down.) All three flight attendants shouted the commands “heads down, stay down” before and during landing. After landing, the flight attendants began checking on passengers. Flight attendant A disarmed the forward galley door, and flight attendant B disarmed the aft doors. Flight attendant A instructed flight attendant C to stay with the injured passenger and ensure that CPR compressions continued. Flight attendant C reported that the passengers in seats 8D and 11C continued CPR compressions until emergency response personnel boarded the airplane. 1.8 Tests and Research 1.8.1 Metallurgical Examinations As stated in section 1.3.4.1, the fan blades, shims, spacers, and platforms from the accident engine were sent to the NTSB’s Materials Laboratory for examination. All of the components, including the fracture surface on the dovetail piece of fan blade No. 13, were examined visually and under optical magnification. Fan blade No. 13 had fractured at the root (see figure 7) about 0.04 inch outboard of the dovetail coating and at multiple locations in the middle of the airfoil. The fracture surface had a smooth region with six well-defined curved lines, which were consistent with fatigue. These lines, referred to as crack arrest lines, generally represent changes in the stress state, environment, or time interval associated with fatigue crack growth. The six crack arrest lines are shown in figure 16. Ratchet marks (which are formed when two adjacent fatigue cracks originate on slightly offset planes) were also observed on the fracture surface, consistent with multiple fatigue origins on the convex side of the blade about 0.6 inch aft of the leading edge. The two largest ratchet marks are also shown in figure 16. The six crack arrest lines were a portion of the fatigue region that was 0.976 inch long axially at the fan blade surface and had a maximum depth of 0.263 inch. (The depths of the crack arrest lines ranged from 0.037 to 0.263 inch for arrest lines 1 through 6, respectively.) Beyond that area, fracture features were in a relatively flat plane that was 2.232 inches long axially and had a maximum depth of 0.483 inch. Beyond the flat-plane fatigue region, the fracture surface had features that were consistent with ductile overstress fracture. The blade coating was intact and appeared generally uniform in texture and color on both the convex and concave sides of the dovetail without any spalling (flaking of material). Examination of the other 23 fan blades showed deformation, tearing, and fractures consistent with hard-body impacts, such as those from blade fragments. The dovetails for these fan blades showed no evidence of cracks. The copper-nickel-indium coating on many of the fan blade dovetails showed evidence of heavy sliding contact, with sliding marks and deformation oriented in the radial direction. The fan blades also showed varying amounts of chipping and spalling on the dovetail coating, most of which were at the forward and aft ends of the contact faces on the convex and concave sides of the dovetails, especially in fan blade Nos. 1 through 4 and 18 through 24. Fan blades adjacent to the No. 13 blade also showed disturbances to the dovetail coating, including sliding contact damage. Similar damage was not observed on the dovetail of fan blade No. 13, indicating that the damage to the intact fan blades was secondary to the FBO event. Most fan blade shims were intact, but the shims for blade Nos. 11 and 12 were cracked. Specifically, the shim for blade No. 11 was cracked at the outboard edge of the contact face on the concave side of the shim, and the shim for blade No. 12 (which trailed fan blade No. 13) was cracked along the inboard edge of the contact face on both sides of the shim. Many of the fan blade platforms showed cracks, deformation, and fractures at the sides contacting the blade airfoils. The fan blade platform for the No. 12 blade had fractured, and most of the platform was missing. The fracture surfaces of the fan blade platforms were consistent with overstress. The spacers for each fan blade were present and were intact. Some fretting contact damage was observed on the forward face of the spacers. Additional examinations of fan blade No. 13 The fracture surface of fan blade No. 13 was also examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The crack arrest lines that were visible under optical magnification (as shown in figure 16) were also generally visible in SEM images. Secondary crack features that were consistent with additional fatigue cracks were observed on the blade surface adjacent to the fracture origin area. At higher SEM magnifications, striations consistent with low-cycle fatigue crack growth were observed on the fracture surface. The striation spacing generally became larger as the depth of the crack increased and as the crack advanced toward the arrest lines. Immediately beyond the crack arrest lines, the striation spacing changed abruptly; the spacing between striations was shorter than the spacing before the arrest lines, which was consistent with a temporary reduction in crack growth rate after each arrest line had formed. The fracture surface in the area of stable fatigue crack growth was examined to estimate the number of striations in that area. One striation is usually associated with one flight cycle; thus, the total number of flight cycles associated with crack growth is about equal to the estimated number of striations. For crack growth from a depth of 0.0005 inch to the crack arrest line with the maximum depth of 0.263 inch (arrest line 6), the number of striations was estimated to be 18,400. The number of flight cycles between six of the last seven relubrications (which ranged from 1,255 to 2,201 cycles) was similar to the estimated number of cycles accumulated between crack arrest lines, which ranged from 1,608 to 2,539 cycles. The number of cycles for the crack growth beyond arrest line 6 was estimated from the number of flight cycles accumulated since the last fan blade relubrication, which occurred in June 2017. Between that time and the time of the accident, the engine and the fan blade set accumulated 1,704 cycles. A crack arrest line would be expected on a fracture surface after a relubrication or an overhaul because of the change to the stress state. (In this case, relubrication changes the contact friction at the dovetail.) Thus, crack arrest line 6 on fan blade No. 13 was assumed to be associated with the last blade relubrication, and the crack growth beyond crack arrest line 6 was assumed to be associated with the 1,704 cycles accumulated since the last relubrication. This number of cycles was added to the estimated 18,400 cycles associated with crack growth from 0.0005 to 0.263 inch (the latter of which was the depth of crack arrest line 6), and the result showed that the estimated total number of cycles from a depth of 0.0005 inch to blade failure was about 20,000 cycles. In addition, the estimated total cycles of crack growth from the crack depth associated with crack arrest line 2 (0.068 inch) to fan blade failure (0.483 inch) was about 10,000 cycles. This number of cycles matched closely (within 10%) with the number of cycles (10,712) since the time of the fan blade set’s last overhaul in October 2012, indicating that the fan blade crack had likely initiated before the overhaul. The estimated total number of cycles from a depth of 0.0005 inch to fan blade failure (0.483 inch) was about 20,000 cycles; thus, crack arrest line 2 had accumulated about 10,000 cycles of growth from a depth of 0.0005 to 0.068 inch. A metallographic examination was also conducted using transverse cross-section samples from the dovetail piece of fan blade No. 13. The samples were cut from the overstress regions at the middle of the blade and near the trailing (aft) end of the dovetail contact face. The cross-section samples were polished and then etched to reveal the blade microstructure, which was consistent with the expected microstructure for the specified material. No material or manufacturing anomalies were observed on the surfaces. Nondestructive inspections of intact fan blades Nondestructive inspections were conducted on 22 of the 23 intact fan blades using ultrasonic inspection, FPI, and eddy current inspection (ECI) procedures at the GE Engineering Materials Systems Laboratory in Evendale, Ohio, and the Safran Aircraft Engines Failure Analysis Laboratory in Moissy-Cramayel, France, to identify any cracks on the concave and convex sides of the fan blade roots. (Blade No. 20 was examined on scene and was excluded from these additional inspections because that blade had been sectioned for SEM and metallographic examinations.) The inspections were consistent with the CFM-recommended ultrasonic inspection procedures used during fan blade relubrications (see SB 72-1033 in section 1.10.2.3) and the FPI and ECI procedures used during fan blade overhauls. No indications of cracks were found on the inspected fan blades (Nos. 1 through 12, 14 through 19, and 21 through 24). Residual stress measurements Residual stress measurements were made, in the radial and/or longitudinal (axial) directions, on fan blade Nos. 13 and 20 at Lambda Technologies in Cincinnati, Ohio, and fan blade Nos. 3, 12, 23, and 24 at the Safran Materials and Processes Laboratory in Evry Corbeil and Vernon, France. The residual stress measurements were performed using x-ray diffraction on multiple areas of the dovetail surfaces and at varying depths up to 0.0083 inch. The measurements were compared with reference residual stress depth profile data (provided by Safran) for fan blades that were shot-peened in accordance with specified parameters. The results of the residual stress measurements showed abnormal residual stress profiles, including residual tension near the surface, in one or more locations on each of the intact fan blades (Nos. 3, 12, 20, 23, and 24) compared with the reference residual stress depth profile data. A total of 14 measurements were made for these fan blades, and 11 of these measurements showed that the minimum residual stress value was higher (less compressive) than the expected minimum value. Residual stress measurements were taken at two locations on fractured fan blade No. 13, and the measurements showed residual stress profiles that were similar to the expected profile Although fan blade No. 13 had a normal residual stress profile, crack growth estimates developed during fractographic (optical and SEM) examinations showed that the blade had been overhauled after the crack had initiated. As part of the overhaul, fan blade No. 13 was shot-peened (along with all of the other fan blades in the set). The shot-peening process resets the residual stress state and removes any evidence of the relaxed residual stresses that appear to be associated with crack initiation, which could explain why the fan blade’s residual stress profile was similar to the reference residual stress profile. Even though all of the other fan blades in the set were also shot-peened during the overhaul, some of those blades experienced higher-than-normal stresses after the FBO event, resulting in the abnormal residual stress profiles for fan blade Nos. 3, 12, 20, 23, and 24. Additional metallurgical examinations Between the date of the accident and June 30, 2018, cracks were detected on four fan blades installed on separate engines through either an ECI during overhaul or an ultrasonic inspection as part of blade relubrication. All of the cracks were in the shot-peened area of the dovetail and were located between 0.552 and 0.598 inch radially from the fan blade root. These fan blades were sent to CFM for examination; afterward, two of the blades were examined at the GE Engineering Materials Systems facility, and the other two blades were examined at the Safran Aircraft Engines Failure Analysis Laboratory. Table 4 presents information about the four fan blades, and section 1.10.3 presents information about cracks found on other fan blades after June 2018. 1.8.2 Timeline Study The national transportation safety board conducted a timeline study to determine when, during the accident sequence, the cabin window most likely departed the airplane and the cabin most likely depressurized. The study also evaluated the amount of time that could have elapsed between the FBO event and the window’s departure from the airplane. flight data recorder data showed that the left engine’s fan speed decreased rapidly between 1103:32.7 and 1103:33.7. The flight data recorder sampled the fan speed parameter once per second. To determine when, during that second, the FBO event occurred, the national transportation safety board considered flight data recorder lateral, longitudinal, and vertical acceleration data, which were sampled four times per second (lateral and longitudinal acceleration) and eight times per second (vertical acceleration). On the basis of the changes in acceleration data, the FBO event likely occurred between 1103:33.1 and 1103:33.3. To facilitate additional work as part of this study, the national transportation safety board assumed that the FBO event occurred at the midpoint of the time range, 1103:33.2, which matched the flight data recorder acceleration, pitch, roll, and engine data showing that the time of the FBO event was 1103:33.2. flight data recorder data showed that the cabin altitude warning parameter, which was sampled once per second, transitioned from no warning to warning between 1103:37.6 and 1103:38.6. Given the study’s assumption that the FBO event occurred at 1103:33.2, the cabin altitude warning would have occurred about 4.4 to 5.4 seconds later, which was consistent with the time that the cockpit voice recorder recorded the warning (1103:39). As stated in section 1.7.2, Boeing calculated that the cabin pressure would have been 5,773 ft as the airplane was climbing through an altitude of 32,600 ft. Section 1.7.2 also stated that the cabin pressure controller logged a 10,000-ft cabin altitude status message when the airplane was at an altitude of 32,610 ft. To determine the time that it would have taken for the cabin to depressurize to the point at which the 10,000-ft message would be received, the national transportation safety board developed a plot showing cabin altitude versus time (based on information that Boeing provided) using the assumption that the cabin altitude before depressurization was 5,773 ft. The national transportation safety board also assumed that the window that departed the airplane was unobstructed and that the size of the hole left by the window after it departed the airplane was 167.6 square inches. (This figure was based on the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal measurements of the window shown in figure 15.) According to Boeing, the cabin altitude warning switch hardware accomplishment summary a tolerance band of ± 1,000 ft; thus, the 10,000-ft message could have occurred between a cabin altitude of 9,000 and 11,000 ft. As a result, the study found that, for an unobstructed window, the cabin altitude warning switch would likely have closed sometime between 2.2 and 3.6 seconds after the cabin began to depressurize. To determine the amount of time between the FBO event and the departure of the window from the airplane, the national transportation safety board considered the study findings that (1) the cabin altitude warning occurred between 4.4 and 5.4 seconds after the FBO event and (2) between 2.2 and 3.6 seconds elapsed until the cabin depressurized to the point at which the cabin altitude warning switch would likely have closed and triggered the cabin altitude warnings. Accordingly, the minimum time that the window could have departed after the FBO event was 0.8 to 1.8 seconds, and the maximum time was 2.2 to 3.2 seconds. Because the window was unlikely to be fully unobstructed after the FBO event, the study shifted the lower end of the minimum time for window departure from 0.8 to 0.0 second. The study results showed that the timeframe during which the window could have departed the airplane was 0.0 to 3.2 seconds after the FBO event. During that timeframe, the following events would have occurred either before or simultaneously with the window’s departure from the airplane: the inlet and fan cowl were structurally damaged, the fan cowl halves separated, fan cowl portions departed the airplane, and a fan cowl fragment (the inboard aft latch keeper) impacted the fuselage. Table 5 summarizes the study’s findings regarding the timeline for the departure of the fan cowl and the window, which light-emitting diode to the rapid cabin depressurization. 1.9 Organizational Information—Southwest Airlines According to its operations specifications, SWA operated 741 Boeing 737 airplanes, including 510 Boeing 737-700 airplanes, at the time of the accident. All of the company’s 737NG-series airplanes were equipped with CFM56-7B engines. 1.9.1 Flight Manuals and Checklists Section 5 of the SWA Flight Operations Manual stated that, in all non-normal situations, flight crewmembers should take the following actions: •Maintain aircraft control •Analyze the problem •Take appropriate action •Maintain situational awareness This information was also printed on the cover of the SWA Boeing 737NG QRH. Both flight crewmembers stated that they were focused on the first item on the list, maintaining aircraft control, during the emergency descent. SWA had two printed flight deck resources for pilots to use during non-normal situations in flight: the quick reference handbook and the Quick Reference Card (QRC). The QRC was intended to assist flight crews in accomplishing specific items in non-normal checklists. The QRC listed the steps necessary to stabilize the situation and, if required, prompted the crew to complete the remainder of a non-normal checklist using the QRH. Non-normal checklists contained immediate action items, quick reference items, and/or reference items. Immediate action items were time-critical steps that had to be committed to and accomplished from memory. Immediate action items were listed above a red dashed line on the QRC and in the QRH. Quick reference items were time-sensitive steps that were completed using the QRC; these steps were also included in the QRH. Quick reference items were listed above a black dashed line on the QRC and in the QRH. Reference items were actions or steps that were to be accomplished by using a non-normal checklist in the QRH. The four non-normal checklists that applied to the circumstances of this accident were Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation, One Engine Inoperative Landing, Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization, and Emergency Descent. The flight crew performed most of the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage checklist. Although the flight crew did not execute the other checklists using the standard checklist procedure (during which the crewmembers formally interact with each other to read the checklist and take the appropriate action), some of the items on the Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization and the Emergency Descent checklists were performed. The flight crew also performed the Before Landing checklist, which was a normal checklist. Each of these in-flight checklists is presented in sections 1.9.1.1 through 1.9.1.5. 1.9.1.1 Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation According to SWA’s Boeing 737NG QRH, the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist should be accomplished if an engine fire warning, airframe vibrations with abnormal engine indications, and/or an engine separation occur. The three-page checklist, which had 14 items, is shown in figure 17. The first five items on the checklist were considered to be quick reference (time-sensitive) items, as indicated by the dashed black line below the fifth item. Step 14 of the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist instructed flight crewmembers to “plan to land at the nearest suitable airport.” The SWA Flight Operations Manual stated that, “whenever an engine fails, or rotation of an engine is stopped to prevent possible damage, the Captain must land the aircraft at the nearest suitable airport, in point of time, at which a safe landing can be made.” The SWA 737NG quick reference handbook stated that “there are some situations where the Flight Deck Crew must land at the nearest suitable airport,” one of which was an engine failure. The SWA 737NG quick reference handbook provided definitions of “nearest airport” and “suitable airport” to support decision-making. The quick reference handbook defined “nearest airport” as the “nearest airport in point of time.” The quick reference handbook also stated that “two airports of different distances may be considered equal airports if a normal descent requires the same amount of time to arrive at either airport.” The quick reference handbook defined “suitable airport” as “the most suitable airport to handle the non-normal situation.” The quick reference handbook explained that “several factors should be evaluated to determine airport suitability,” including emergency response, airport facilities, and weather. The quick reference handbook further stated that, if all factors are equal, “landing at an on-line airport may be desirable.” 1.9.1.2 One Engine Inoperative Landing Flight crewmembers were directed, after step 14 of the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist, to go around to the One Engine Inoperative Landing checklist. This checklist had six items on the first page, as shown in figure 18, all of which were reference items. The checklist also included two pages with a total of seven deferred items. The SWA 737NG quick reference handbook stated that deferred items in checklists were “special items needed to configure the aircraft for landing.” 1.9.1.3 Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization The SWA Boeing 737NG quick reference handbook stated that the Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization checklist should be accomplished if a cabin altitude exceedance occurs and/or either the intermittent cabin altitude/configuration warning horn sounds or a cabin altitude light (if operative) illuminates during flight. The checklist had seven items, as shown in figure 19. The first two items were considered to be immediate action (memory) items, as indicated by the red dashed line below the second item. The next four items were considered to be quick reference (time-sensitive) items, as indicated by the dashed black line below the sixth item. The checklist also had one page with four deferred items. The four black squares after step 5 indicate the end of the checklist if the cabin altitude is uncontrollable (because the Emergency Descent checklist would need to be performed). 1.9.1.4 Emergency Descent The SWA Boeing 737NG quick reference handbook stated that the Emergency Descent checklist should be accomplished if the cabin altitude cannot be controlled and/or a rapid descent is needed. The one-page checklist, which had 11 items, is shown in figure 20. All of the items on the checklist were considered to be quick reference (time-sensitive) items, as indicated by the dashed black line below the last item. 1.9.1.5 Before Landing The SWA B737NG Aircraft Operating Manual flight deck card for 737-700 and -800 normal checklists showed the Before Landing checklist. That checklist comprised the following three items: Speedbrake…………………………………………ARMED, Green Light Landing Gear…………………………………………DN [down], 3 Green Flaps………………………………………………..[position], Green Light 1.9.2 Flight Crew Training SWA used an FAA-approved advanced qualification program to train its flight crewmembers. According to SWA’s Advanced Qualification Program Manual, the program provides “operationally relevant, systematically designed and statistically validated training.” The manual also stated that “the intended result of this training is improved technical and human factors skills as well as decreased operational risk.” The advanced qualification program comprised three primary curriculums: indoctrination; qualification; and continuing qualification training, which consisted of classroom training, device ground training, and full-flight simulator training. Pilots practiced flight maneuvers and emergency procedures in a full-flight simulator, and a maneuvers observation and a line operational evaluation (LOE) were administered to pilots in the simulator each year. Maneuvers observation events provided SWA pilots with practice performing “critical or infrequently used” skills. The captain and the first officer satisfactorily completed their maneuvers observation on May 2 and November 7, 2017, respectively. Their maneuvers observation included two events that were relevant to the circumstances of the accident: engine failure/severe damage/fire during takeoff and engine failure during approach/instrument landing system category I minimums/flameout. LOE events comprised the skills required in normal and non-normal operations. LOE events were designed to evaluate a pilot’s behavior and “risk and resource management” skills, including the identification and management of errors. The LOE scenarios changed each year. The captain and the first officer satisfactorily completed their LOE on May 3 and November 8, 2017, respectively. The LOE scenarios in 2017 did not include any events related to the accident circumstances. SWA’s advanced qualification program also included special purpose operational training, which provided pilots with instruction and practice on a single skill set after completion of the pilots’ LOE. The training was conducted in a full-flight simulator. In 2016, SWA’s special purpose operational training included a rapid depressurization/emergency descent event. 1.9.3 Flight Attendant Manual The SWA flight attendant manual that was current at the time of the accident was dated November 17, 2017. The manual included topics related to the airplane, its equipment, and emergency and first airport information desk procedures. Section 2.4.2, “Decompression,” stated that a “slow or sudden loss of cabin pressure can result from a failure in the pressurization system, a leaking door or window, or structural failure” and that a decompression “may be gradual and unnoticed in the cabin, or it may be sudden and loud, accompanied by a drop in temperature, rushing air, and fogging.” The manual also stated the following: At the equivalent of 14,000 feet, oxygen masks in the cabin and entry areas deploy automatically; they can also be deployed by the Pilots. The Pilots will put the aircraft into an emergency descent immediately. This will affect the ability to stand upright and walk. Prompt administration of oxygen prevents hypoxia. This is the essential first step in any decompression. Once Flight Attendants have administered oxygen to themselves, other issues can be dealt with in order of importance. Section 2.4.2 also provided the four-step procedure that flight attendants were to follow during an emergency decompression. The first two steps, in order, were to “take oxygen from the nearest mask immediately” and “secure yourself.” The third step, which was to be accomplished by the flight attendant nearest to the forward control panel after the airplane reached a safe walking attitude, involved turning the cabin lights to bright and making the following process assurance announcement explaining the use of oxygen: “Ladies and gentlemen, pull down on the mask in front of you. Place the mask over your nose and mouth and breathe normally. The bag may not inflate. You are [emphasis in original] receiving oxygen. Fasten seatbelts and positively no smoking.” The last step was for flight attendants to don the nearest portable oxygen bottle, go around through the aisle mask by mask to assist passengers in the cabin, and check the lavatories. Section 3.8.0, “Emergency Oxygen System,” described the locations and function of the supplemental oxygen system in the cabin. Section 1.4.13, “Portable Oxygen Bottle,” described the locations of the bottles on the 737-700 (the forward and aft entry stowage compartments) and the in-flight use of the bottles for decompression and first airport information desk situations. The manual noted that, when the bottles are fully pressurized, they provide at least 60 minutes of oxygen. Section 2.2.0, “First airport information desk During Landing,” stated, “in a life-threatening medical situation during a routine landing, a Flight Attendant may be called on to administer first aid. The Flight Attendant might not be able to occupy the assigned jumpseat.” This section also stated that, during a planned emergency landing, “the Flight Attendant must occupy the jumpseat.” Section 3.1.0, “Takeoff and Landing,” stated that, for every takeoff and landing, the flight attendants’ shoulder harnesses and seat belts should be “securely fastened.” Section 6.5.0, “Prior to Landing,” stated that flight attendant A was responsible for ensuring that flight attendants B and C were seated on their respective jumpseats and that flight attendant C was responsible for ensuring that flight attendant A was seated on the forward jumpseat. In addition, the SWA flight attendant manual provided information in several sections about reseating passengers. According to the manual, reasons to reseat passengers included a slow aerospace information report leak, a lavatory fire, and weight and balance requirements. Other reasons to reseat passengers included accommodating a passenger with a disability and moving a passenger from an exit row seat if that passenger would not be able to provide assistance during an evacuation. None of these situations were similar to the situation aboard the accident flight that necessitated reseating two passengers. Further, the company flight attendant manual did not discuss any actions to take if no seats were available for a passenger who needed to be reseated. 1.9.4 Flight Attendant Training Flight attendants were trained by SWA instructors at Southwest Airlines University. The initial new hire training program was conducted in Dallas. Recurrent training was conducted at each of SWA’s 10 operational bases. SWA provided its flight attendants, during initial training, with a 68-page guide, titled Inflight Initial Learners Guide, which discussed multiple training topics. The version of the guide that was current at the time of the accident was dated March 1, 2018. The training module on in-flight emergencies included a section that addressed causes of decompression and its effects on airplane occupants. The section also included videos of oxygen mask deployment and operation, information about the portable oxygen bottles and flight deck oxygen, and a news report about an April 2011 decompression event involving a SWA airplane. According to in-flight training personnel at Southwest Airlines University, during initial training, flight attendants learn what to tell passengers, over the process assurance system, if an event requiring oxygen masks were to occur. The flight attendants are also provided with a decompression scenario and given an opportunity to either participate in or observe simulated mask deployments. Further, flight attendants receive instruction on assessing oxygen system operation/flow, manually deploying oxygen masks from the passenger service units, and using the portable oxygen bottles. The in-flight training personnel stated that flight attendants were instructed to rtca document (“document order”) the following during a decompression event: (1) take oxygen, (2) secure themselves in a jumpseat or passenger seat, (3) turn the cabin interior lights to “full bright,” and (4) make a process assurance announcement about the decompression and attempt to contact the pilots. These personnel also stated that, once the situation was stable, flight attendants could use a portable oxygen bottle to ensure that passengers were using their masks and check the lavatories for passengers. The senior manager for in-flight training at Southwest Airlines University indicated the reasons that a flight attendant would not be in a jumpseat during landing. These reasons were (1) a flight attendant was providing first airport information desk (in which case the two other flight attendants would be in their jumpseats); (2) a jumpseat was broken, or there was a hole in the fuselage near the assigned jumpseat (in which case the affected flight attendant would be secured in a passenger seat closest to his/her primary exit; and (3) a flight attendant was incapacitated and thus unable to perform required duties. The senior manager stated that “flight attendants need to be on their jumpseat” during landing because it is “the safest, most secure place for them” and because “they have to potentially be able to evacuate that aircraft.” The senior manager also stated that a passenger should not be reseated on a jumpseat instead of a working flight attendant. 1.10 Additional Information 1.10.1 Previous Fan-Blade-Out Accident On August 27, 2016, SWA flight 3472, a Boeing 737-700 equipped with CFM56-7B engines, N766SW, experienced a left engine failure while climbing through flight level 310 near Pascagoula, Mississippi. The flight crew declared an emergency and diverted to Pensacola International Airport (PNS), Pensacola, Florida, where the airplane made an uneventful single-engine landing. None of the 104 occupants aboard the airplane were injured. The airplane was substantially damaged. The regularly scheduled passenger flight was operating under the provisions of 14 code of federal regulations Part 121 from Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana, to Orlando International Airport, Orlando, Florida. The cockpit voice recorder indicated that the flight crewmembers were using their oxygen masks during part of the emergency descent. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed a 16-by-5-inch through-puncture on the left side of the fuselage just below the cabin windows by rows 11 and 12 (with no corresponding damage on the interior cabin sidewall) and numerous impacts along the left side of the fuselage, the left wing, and the left horizontal stabilizer. Also, the left engine inlet was almost completely missing, and the part that remained was severely damaged. In addition, the left winglet front spar was partially severed. Postaccident examination of the left engine (ESN 874112, which had accumulated 38,152 cycles since new) revealed a full-length fan blade separation (blade No. 23) below the blade platform. The blade fractured due to a fatigue crack that initiated in the dovetail on the convex side of the blade near the leading edge, and the maximum crack depth was about 0.695 inch. The estimated striation cycle count was 15,000 cycles. The fan case did not exhibit any through-hole penetrations, and the containment shield was not breached by the exiting fan blade fragments. The damage to the inlet from the exiting fan blade fragments caused portions of the inlet to separate from the airplane, strike the left-side fuselage, and puncture the outer fuselage skin, which light-emitting diode to a cabin depressurization. None of the separated inlet portions were recovered. The fan cowl remained in place. The other 23 blades in the fan blade set exhibited airfoil damage but remained intact and secured within the fan disk. Postaccident examination of the fan blade set by the national transportation safety board and CFM found cracks in the dovetails of 6 of the 23 intact fan blades. These cracks could not be seen through the dovetail coating and were discovered after the coating had been removed. As a result, CFM developed an ultrasonic inspection technique that could be performed with the coating still on the dovetail and could thus be used during the on-wing fan blade inspection at the time of relubrication. Table 6 provides information about the cracked fan blades on the SWA flight 3472 accident engine, including fan blade No. 23, which fractured during the flight. Also, as a result of the SWA flight 3472 accident, CFM developed an ECI procedure for the dovetail to be performed at overhaul (in addition to the FPI that was already required). The ECI involves a manual scan of both the concave and convex sides of the dovetail with the blade coating removed. In November 2016, this requirement was added to CFM’s engine shop manual. 1.10.2 Service Bulletins and Airworthiness Directives This section discusses, and table 7 summarizes, the CFM SBs and the federal aviation administration and european aviation safety agency airworthiness directives (AD) that were issued after the August 27, 2016, SWA flight 3472 accident (see previous section) and the April 17, 2018, SWA flight 1380 accident. This section also includes pertinent information regarding actions taken as a result of the SBs and ADs. On March 24, 2017, CFM issued SB 72-1019, “One Time Ultrasonic Inspection of High Time Fan Blade Dovetails,” which recommended that a one-time ultrasonic inspection of fan blade root/dovetail pressure faces be performed on CFM56-7B engines to check for cracks on all installed fan blades. CFM also recommended that the inspection be completed based on the engine’s cycles since the last shop visit. The SB indicated that, for engines with more than 15,000, 12,000, or 9,000 flight cycles since the last shop visit, the actions in the SB should be performed within 6, 12, or 18 months, respectively, of the date that the SB was issued. CFM defined this SB as “category 2,” which CFM uses when “technical reasons make the compliance necessary.” On June 20, 2017, CFM issued revision 1 to SB 72-1019, which removed two of the recommended compliance intervals (for engines with 12,000 or 9,000 cycles since the last shop visit). Thus, the SB maintained the compliance interval (6 months) only for engines with more than 15,000 cycles since the last shop visit because the number of cycles before the recommended inspection was determined to be adequate. According to SWA, SB 72-1019 applied to 111 of the company’s engines; the left engine installed on the preliminary hazard list accident airplane was not among those engines because it was below the 15,000-cycle threshold for inspection, with 8,483 cycles since the last shop visit at the time that the SB was issued. On August 25, 2017, the federal aviation administration issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) to adopt a new airworthiness directive for certain CFM56-7B turbofan engines (FAA 2017). The notice of proposed rulemaking was based on the information in CFM SB 72-1019 revision 1. According to the NPRM, the proposed airworthiness directive would correct an unsafe condition by requiring an ultrasonic inspection of fan blades and the replacement of blades that failed the inspection. The proposed airworthiness directive would have required CFM56-7B engines with more than 15,000 cycles since the last shop visit to be inspected within 6 months of the effective date of the AD. The proposed airworthiness directive would have also required CFM56-7B engines with 15,000 or fewer cycles in service to be inspected within 18 months after the effective date of the airworthiness directive or at the next fan blade relubrication after the effective date of the AD, whichever occurred first. Thus, the airworthiness directive would have applied to the accident engine. The comment period for the notice of proposed rulemaking closed on October 10, 2017. During the investigative hearing for this accident, the federal aviation administration stated that it was responding to public comments on the notice of proposed rulemaking and developing the final rule at the time of the accident. The federal aviation administration withdrew the notice of proposed rulemaking in September 2018 but issued an emergency airworthiness directive as well as immediate adopted rules between the time of the accident and the withdrawal of the NPRM, as discussed in this section. 1.10.2.2 CFM SB 72-1024 On July 28, 2017, CFM issued SB 72-1024, “Ultrasonic Inspection of Fan Blade Dovetails.” This SB applied to fan blades on CFM56-7B engines that were modified from part number -022 (including -027, which was the part number of the blades installed in the SWA flight 3472 airplane engine). SB 72-1024 recommended that the ultrasonic inspections be performed as soon as possible but no later than December 31, 2018, regardless of an engine’s total number of flight cycles or cycles since the last shop visit. The part number for the fan blades installed in the accident engine (-038) was not included in the SB; thus, the SB did not apply to the accident engine. 1.10.2.3 CFM SB 72-1033 On April 20, 2018 (3 days after the SWA flight 1380 accident), CFM issued SB 72-1033, “Fan Blade Dovetail Repetitive Ultrasonic Inspection,” to address “a condition that may affect flight safety.” The SB recommended initial and repetitive ultrasonic inspections for all CFM56-7B engine fan blades based on an engine’s cycles since new (and not the engine’s cycles since the last shop visit, as with SB 72-1019). This SB established the following initial inspection procedures: •For engines with 30,000 or more cycles since new, perform the initial fan blade dovetail ultrasonic inspection within 20 days (May 10, 2018) of the SB date. •For engines with less than 30,000 cycles since new, if the fan blade cycles since new are known, perform the initial ultrasonic inspection no later than 20,000 fan blade cycles since new or August 31, 2018, whichever occurred later. If the fan blade cycles since new are unknown, perform the initial ultrasonic inspection no later than August 31, 2018. SB 72-1033 called for repetitive ultrasonic inspections every 3,000 flight cycles, which corresponded with the upper limit of the fan blade relubrication interval at the time. The SB also addressed fan blades that were not installed on an engine, recommending that those fan blades be inspected before engine installation except if the fan blades had fewer than 20,000 cycles since new or had been inspected according to the SB within the previous 300 flight cycles. On May 9, 2018, CFM issued revision 1 to SB 72-1033, which moved the completion date forward, from August 31 to June 30, 2018, for the ultrasonic inspections of CFM56-7B fan blades with more than 20,000 cycles since new. The SB indicated that the fan blades with the highest number of cycles should receive priority. Revision 1 did not change any other inspection provision recommended in the initial SB, but CFM defined the revised SB as “category 1,” meaning that “compliance is mandatory, generally as a result of the directorate generale of civil aviation or federal aviation administration action…. Will cause customer action.” On July 27, 2018, CFM issued revision 2 (category 1) to SB 72-1033, which reduced the interval for repetitive inspections from within 3,000 to 1,600 flight cycles. This change was based on the results from the cracked fan blade inspections and CFM’s revised crack propagation analysis, which reflected the findings from the inspections. On November 6, 2018, CFM issued revision 3 (category 1) to SB 72-1033 to update the fan blade dovetail inspection procedures as follows: •For fan blades with more than 16,000 cycles since new, perform the initial dovetail ultrasonic inspection within 1,000 flight cycles or before 20,000 cycles since new. For all other fan blades, perform the inspection before 17,000 cycles since new. •For replacement fan blades with more than 17,000 cycles since new, complete the initial dovetail ultrasonic inspection. If a fan blade’s cycles since new are unknown, complete the inspection by November 30, 2018. •Repeat the dovetail ultrasonic inspection every 1,600 flight cycles after the initial inspection. For fan blades with more than 1,600 flight cycles since the initial inspection, repeat the inspection by November 30, 2018. If the initial dovetail ultrasonic inspection was completed before the fan blades accumulated 15,400 cycles since new, the first repetitive inspection could be deferred until the fan blades accumulated 17,000 cycles since new. 1.10.2.4 CFM SB 72-1050 On August 6, 2019, CFM issued SB 72-1050 to provide a recommended removal time for CFM56-7B fan blades. Although the fan blades were not certified as a life-limited part, the SB recommended that high-time fan blades be removed from service because they are susceptible to dovetail cracks. Specifically, CFM recommended that fan blades be removed from service before 55,000 fan blade cycles since new or June 30, 2020, whichever occurs later. For fan blades that have accumulated 55,000 or more fan blade cycles since new, CFM recommended that the fan blades be removed from service not later than the next fan blade dovetail lubrication. 1.10.2.5 federal aviation administration Emergency airworthiness directive 2018-09-51 On April 20, 2018 (the same day that CFM SB 72-1033 was initially issued), the federal aviation administration issued emergency airworthiness directive 2018-09-51 as a result of the fan blade separation and subsequent inlet and fan cowl departure involving SWA flight 1380; the federal aviation administration determined that this unsafe condition was “likely to exist or develop” in other CFM56-7B engines (FAA 2018a). The emergency airworthiness directive targeted CFM56-7B engines with 30,000 or more cycles since new. The emergency airworthiness directive required that, within 20 days (May 10, 2018) of the AD’s issuance, all CFM56-7B fan blades undergo an ultrasonic inspection for cracks (according to the instructions provided in CFM SB 72-1033). The emergency airworthiness directive also required that any fan blade with indications of a crack be removed from service before further flight because “fan blade failure due to cracking, if not addressed, could result in an engine in-flight shutdown…uncontained release of debris, damage to the engine, damage to the airplane, and possible airplane decompression.” When federal aviation administration emergency airworthiness directive 2018-09-51 was issued, SWA had 279 CFM56-7B engines with 30,000 or more cycles since new. These engines were installed on airplanes or were spares available for installation. By April 25, 2018, all 279 engines had received the ultrasonic inspection required by the emergency AD. A crack was discovered on a fan blade installed in one of these engines (see table 4). 1.10.2.6 federal aviation administration automatic dependent surveillance 2018-09-10, 2018-10-11, 2018-18-01, and 2018-26-01 On May 2, 2018, the federal aviation administration issued airworthiness directive 2018-09-10, which mandated initial and repetitive inspections (ultrasonic or ECI) of all CFM56-7B fan blades, including those installed on engines with less than 30,000 cycles (FAA 2018b). (Emergency airworthiness directive 2018-09-51 did not require repetitive inspections or include engines with fewer than 30,000 cycles.) The AD, which had an effective date of May 14, 2018, required an initial inspection before the fan blades accumulated 20,000 cycles since new or within 113 days (September 4, 2018) of the effective date of the AD, whichever was later. The airworthiness directive also required repetitive ultrasonic inspections every 3,000 flight cycles. On May 17, 2018, the federal aviation administration superseded airworthiness directive 2018-09-10 with airworthiness directive 2018-10-11, which revised the compliance time for those CFM56-7B fan blades with more than 20,000 cycles since new because of their higher risk for cracks (FAA 2018c). The AD, which had an effective date of June 1, 2018, required that these fan blades undergo inspections (ultrasonic or ECI) within 30 days (July 1, 2018) of the effective date of the AD; all other fan blades were required to be inspected within 90 days (August 30, 2018) from the effective date of the airworthiness directive or before accumulating 20,000 flight cycles. The airworthiness directive maintained the repetitive ultrasonic inspection requirement of every 3,000 flight cycles. According to SWA, as of May 18, 2018, all of the company’s CFM56-7B fan blades with more than 3,000 cycles since new had been inspected using either ultrasonic inspections or ECIs. In June 2018, a crack on a SWA engine blade was found by an ECI of the dovetail during overhaul (see table 4). On October 1, 2018, the federal aviation administration superseded airworthiness directive 2018-10-11 with airworthiness directive 2018-18-01, which required the same initial inspection as the superseded airworthiness directive but revised the compliance interval for the repetitive inspection (FAA 2018d). The new airworthiness directive required that a repetitive ultrasonic inspection or ECI of the concave and convex sides of the fan blade dovetail occur no later than 1,600 flight cycles since the last inspection or within 450 cycles after October 16, 2018, the effective date of this AD, whichever occurred later. On December 26, 2018, the federal aviation administration superseded airworthiness directive 2018-18-01 with airworthiness directive 2018-26-01, which required the same initial and repetitive inspections as in the superseded airworthiness directive but reduced the compliance time for the initial inspection from 20,000 to 17,000 cycles since new (FAA 2018e). Specifically, for fan blades with 16,000 or fewer cycles since new, the initial ultrasonic inspection was required to be performed before 17,000 cycles since new. For fan blades with more than 16,000 but less than 20,000 cycles since new, the inspection was required to be performed within 1,000 cycles but no later than 20,000 cycles since new. For fan blades with 20,000 or more cycles since new, the inspection was required to be performed before further flight. The airworthiness directive had an effective date of January 10, 2019. In an August 21, 2019, memorandum to the NTSB, the federal aviation administration stated that it was not considering any additional proposed rulemaking for CFM56-7B fan blades. On October 23, 2019, the federal aviation administration indicated that it was planning to issue a Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin that discusses the recommendation in CFM SB 72-1050 (see section 1.10.2.4) to remove CFM56-7B fan blades from service before they accumulate 55,000 fan blade cycles. 1.10.2.7 european aviation safety agency Emergency airworthiness directive 2018-0093-E On April 20, 2018 (the same day that CFM SB 72-1033 and federal aviation administration emergency airworthiness directive 2018-09-51 were issued), european aviation safety agency issued emergency airworthiness directive 2018-0093-E. The emergency airworthiness directive required an initial ultrasonic inspection of all CFM56-7B engine fan blades (EASA 2018b). Similar to the requirements of the FAA’s emergency AD, EASA’s emergency airworthiness directive required compliance within 20 days (May 10, 2018) of the AD’s issue date for engines with 30,000 or more flight cycles. The airworthiness directive stated that, for engines with fewer than 30,000 flight cycles and fan blades with either 20,000 or more cycles or unknown times, the required action had to be completed by August 31, 2018. For engines with fewer than 30,000 flight cycles and fan blades with fewer than 20,000 cycles, the required action had to be completed either by August 31 or before the fan blades reached 20,000 cycles, whichever occurred later. The airworthiness directive also required repetitive ultrasonic inspections within 3,000 flight cycles. Fan blades with discrepancies were required to be replaced before the next flight or before the engine’s return to service. 1.10.2.8 european aviation safety agency automatic dependent surveillance 2018-0109, 2018-0211, and 2019-0018 On May 17, 2018, european aviation safety agency superseded emergency airworthiness directive 2018-0093-E with airworthiness directive 2018-0109, which became effective the next day. The new airworthiness directive reduced the compliance time for the initial ultrasonic inspection of CFM56-7B engine fan blades that had more than 20,000 cycles since new (EASA 2018c). For fan blades with 20,000 or more cycles since new, and for fan blades with an unknown number of cycles installed on engines with 20,000 to 30,000 cycles since new, the initial inspection was required within 43 days (July 30, 2018) of the effective date of the AD. For fan blades with an unknown number of cycles installed on engines with less than 20,000 flight cycles, the initial inspection was required within 133 days (August 11, 2018) of the date of european aviation safety agency emergency airworthiness directive 2018-0093-E (April 20, 2018). On September 28, 2018, european aviation safety agency superseded airworthiness directive 2018-0109 with airworthiness directive 2018-0211, which reduced the interval for the repetitive ultrasonic inspections from 3,000 to 1,600 flight cycles (EASA 2018d). The airworthiness directive allowed operators of CFM56-7B engines with fan blades that had passed an ultrasonic inspection as of October 5, 2018, the effective date of the AD, to defer the next inspection until 2 months after the effective date of the airworthiness directive as long as 3,000 flight cycles had not elapsed since the time of the last blade inspection. On January 30, 2019, european aviation safety agency superseded airworthiness directive 2018-0211 with airworthiness directive 2019-0018, which reduced the threshold for the initial ultrasonic inspection (EASA 2019). For fan blades with 16,000 or fewer cycles since new, the initial ultrasonic inspection was required to be performed before 17,000 cycles since new. For fan blades with more than 16,000 but less than 20,000 cycles since new, the inspection was required to be performed within 1,000 flight cycles after February 13, 2019 (the effective date of the AD), and without exceeding 20,000 cycles since new. For fan blades with 20,000 or more cycles since new and fan blades with an unknown number of cycles, the inspection was required to be performed before the next flight after the effective date of the AD. 1.10.3 CFM56-7B Fan Blade Inspections According to CFM, when federal aviation administration Emergency airworthiness directive 2018-09-51 and european aviation safety agency Emergency airworthiness directive 2018-0093-E were issued, about 640 engines worldwide had accumulated 30,000 cycles since new (the inspection criteria). By May 10, 2018 (the compliance date for the ADs), all 640 engines had been inspected. CFM considered the inspection required by the emergency automatic dependent surveillance to be the first of three inspection campaigns. CFM considered those engines addressed by revision 1 to SB 72-1033 to be part of the second inspection campaign. CFM estimated that about 5,400 engines had fan blades with more than 20,000 cycles (the inspection criteria). The SB compliance date was June 30, 2018. CFM’s third (and final) campaign was to inspect the fan blades on all other engines by August 31, 2018 (the compliance date for SB 72-1033 for engines with fan blades not subject to revision 1 of the SB). CFM estimated that about 4,250 engines met that criteria. In addition, CFM estimated that about 356,000 CFM56-7B fan blades and 14,659 CFM56-7B engines had been delivered as of August 22, 2018. According to CFM, by that date, all CFM56-7B fan blades targeted by federal aviation administration airworthiness directive 2018-10-11 and european aviation safety agency airworthiness directive 2018-0109 had either an on-wing ultrasonic inspection or an ECI during a shop visit or were cleared through paperwork indicating that the fan blades had fewer than 20,000 cycles. As of June 2018, 15 cracked CFM56-7B fan blades had been confirmed. Two of these cracked blades were confirmed during postaccident examinations of the fractured blades associated with the SWA flight 3472 (PNS) and flight 1380 (PHL) FBO events. Six of the cracked blades were also installed on the SWA flight 3472 engine (see table 6) and were discovered during postaccident inspections (FPI, ECI, or ultrasonic) of the blades. Of the remaining seven cracked blades, three were found during the time between the SWA flight 3472 and flight 1380 accidents, and four were found in the 2 months after the SWA flight 1380 accident (see table 4). The cracks on these seven blades were detected by either ultrasonic inspection during on-wing inspections with the dovetail coating still present or ECI during overhaul with the dovetail coating removed. Examination of the 15 cracked fan blades revealed no material anomalies. All of the cracks were located in the highest (maximum) low-cycle fatigue predicted stress areas—the leading edge on the convex side of the fan blade dovetail and the trailing edge of the concave side of the blade dovetail). For 14 of the 15 fan blades, the estimated cumulative striation cycle count ranged from 4,000 to 20,000 cycles, which resulted in an average cycle count of about 9,500 cycles. (Data were insufficient to estimate the striation cycle count for one fan blade.) CFM reevaluated the fan blade dovetail stresses and found that the fatigue cracks initiated in an area of high stress on the dovetail and that the dovetail was experiencing peak stresses that were higher than originally predicted. CFM also found that the higher operational stresses resulted from coating spalling, higher friction levels when operated without lubrication or a shim, variations in coating thickness, higher dovetail edge loading (at the dovetail contact surface and fan disk interface) than predicted, and a loss or relaxation of compressive residual stress. As a result, in July 2018, CFM decreased the interval between relubrications from within 3,000 to 1,600 cycles to reduce the overall stresses on the fan blade dovetail. Between August and December 2018, four additional cracked fan blades on CFM56-7B engines were identified during ECIs; three of those blades were installed on different SWA engines. The four fan blades had accumulated between about 21,000 and 36,000 cycles since new when the cracks were detected. For three of the four blades, the estimated cumulative striation cycle count ranged from 2,300 to 8,200 cycles, which resulted in an average cycle count of about 5,000 cycles. (The estimated striation cycle count for one blade was not determined.) The three cracks had a depth of 0.014 (concave side), 0.009 (convex side), and 0.026 inch (convex side). Through August 2019, another four cracked fan blades on CFM56-7B engines were identified during ECIs. The fan blades, which were installed on different SWA engines, had accumulated between 37,000 and 43,000 cycles since new. One fan blade had cracks on both the concave and convex sides, two fan blades had a crack on the convex side, and one fan blade had a crack on the concave side. 2. Analysis 2.1 Introduction This accident occurred after fan blade No. 13 in the left engine fractured at its root, with the dovetail (part of the blade root) remaining within a slot of the fan disk. The separated fan blade impacted the engine fan case and fractured into multiple fragments. Some of those fragments traveled forward into the inlet, causing substantial damage to the inlet structure. The energy from the impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case resulted in local deformation of the fan case, which started a high-energy displacement wave that propagated circumferentially and caused additional damage to the inlet structure. The fan blade’s impact with the fan case also caused substantial damage to the fan cowl structure, including fractures that initiated and rapidly propagated within the fan cowl. As a result, portions of the inlet and fan cowl departed the airplane. A fan cowl fragment contacted the fuselage, causing a cabin window to depart the airplane, a rapid depressurization, and a passenger fatality. The flight crew conducted an emergency descent and made a safe single-engine landing at PHL. The following analysis summarizes the accident (section 2.2) and evaluates the following: •CFM’s certification of the engine and Boeing’s certification of the inlet and fan cowl (section 2.3), •the flight crew’s checklist performance and emergency landing airport selection (section 2.4), and •occupant safety during emergency landings (section 2.5). After completing a comprehensive review of the circumstances that light-emitting diode to this accident, the investigation established that the following factors did not contribute to the cause of the accident: Flight crew qualifications. The flight crew was properly certificated and qualified in accordance with SWA requirements and 14 code of federal regulations Part 121. Flight crew medical conditions. The flight crew held valid and current medical certificates. A review of the flight crew’s work and sleep schedules and recent activities showed no evidence of factors that could have adversely affected the performance of either crewmember on the day of the accident. Airplane mechanical conditions. The airplane was properly certificated, equipped, and maintained in accordance with 14 code of federal regulations Part 121. No evidence indicated any structural, engine, or system failures before the left engine failure occurred. Thus, the national transportation safety board concludes that none of the following were factors in this accident: (1) flight crew qualifications, which were in accordance with US regulations; (2) flight crew medical conditions; (3) the airworthiness of the airplane before the left engine failure occurred; and (4) SWA’s maintenance of the airplane. In addition, the cockpit voice recorder transcript indicated that, after landing, the captain intended to pull the cockpit voice recorder circuit breaker, but she had most likely pulled the three circuit breakers for the flight data recorder given her comment, “I just pulled all three.” As a result, the cockpit voice recorder continued to record. However, because the cockpit voice recorder records data in a continuous loop, valuable investigative information could have been lost. Although that was not the case for this investigation, the national transportation safety board notes that it is important for flight crews involved in an accident or incident to properly perform the procedure to deactivate the CVR. 2.2 Accident Summary 2.2.1 Fan Blade Release Fan blade No. 13 in the left engine separated due to a low-cycle fatigue crack that initiated in the blade root dovetail outboard of the blade coating. Metallurgical examination of the fan blade found that its material composition and microstructure were consistent with the specified titanium alloy and that no surface anomalies or material defects were observed in the fracture origin area. The fracture surface had fatigue cracks that initiated close to where the greatest stresses from operational loads, and thus the greatest potential for cracking, were predicted to occur. The accident fan blade failed with 32,636 cycles since new. Similarly, the fractured fan blade associated with the August 2016 PNS accident (see section 1.10.1), as well as the six other cracked fan blades from the PNS accident engine, failed with 38,152 cycles since new. Further, 15 other cracked fan blades on CFM56-7B engines had been identified between May 2017 and August 2019, and those fan blades had accumulated an average of about 33,000 cycles since new when the cracks were detected. After the PNS accident, CFM reevaluated the fan blade dovetail stresses and determined that the cracks in the fan blade dovetail initiated in an area of high stress on the blade because normal operational stresses on the dovetail were higher than the peak stresses that were originally predicted. Before the application of the dovetail coating during manufacturing and before the reapplication of the coating that is stripped during each overhaul, the entire blade, including the dovetail, is shot-peened to provide a compressive residual stress surface layer for the material, which increases the fatigue strength of the material and relieves surface tensile stresses that can lead to cracking. However, higher-than-expected dovetail operational stresses can lead to the loss/relaxation of residual stress (the stress that is present in solid material in the absence of external forces) and premature fatigue crack initiation. As part of the preliminary hazard list investigation, five intact fan blades from the accident fan disk were examined to determine their residual stress condition. The results of the residual stress measurements showed abnormal residual stress profiles, including relaxed peak compressive stresses (most with residual tension near the surface), in one or more locations on each of the fan blade dovetails in the shot-peened area. Abnormal residual stress profiles were also measured on fan blade dovetails from the PNS accident engine and on two cracked blades (found during subsequent inspections) that had not been shot-peened (as part of overhaul) since the time that the cracks were estimated to have initiated. One method that CFM used to maintain the fan blade loads within the predicted range and reduce the overall stresses on the blade root in the contact areas was repetitive relubrication of the fan blade dovetails. As part of the relubrication, the fan blades were visually inspected for crack indications. Between November 29, 2012 (the date that the left engine was installed on the preliminary hazard list accident airplane), and April 17, 2018 (the date of the preliminary hazard list accident), the dovetails on the accident fan blade set were relubricated seven times; thus, there would have been seven visual inspections of the fan blades. However, no cracks were found, even though the crack on fan blade No. 13 had likely existed since October 2012 (the date of the last fan blade overhaul). Given the surface finish and compressive surface residual stress state of the fan blades, the size of the crack on the accident fan blade was likely below the visual inspection detection threshold. The crack was located outboard of the fan blade dovetail coating. However, during the investigation of the PNS accident, the national transportation safety board observed fan blade cracks that had initiated and propagated underneath the dovetail coating. Because such cracks might not be detected during a visual inspection, CFM implemented, in March 2017, an on-wing ultrasonic inspection method (developed in November 2016) to detect cracks with the coating still on the dovetail. After completion of the ultrasonic inspection, the fan blade dovetails are relubricated before being reinstalled in the fan disk. After the PNS accident, CFM issued SBs that addressed the ultrasonic inspections of high-cycle CFM56-7B fan blades. One of these SBs, revision 1 of SB 72-1019 (issued on June 20, 2017), called for a one-time ultrasonic inspection of all CFM56-7B engines with more than 15,000 cycles since the last shop visit; this inspection was to be performed within 6 months of the SB issue date. The SB applied to 111 of SWA’s engines, but the left engine installed on the preliminary hazard list accident airplane was not one of them because the engine had accumulated 8,483 cycles since the last shop visit and thus was below the inspection threshold. Another related SB, 72-1024 (issued on July 28, 2017), called for a one-time ultrasonic inspection of CFM56-7B engines with fan blades that had specific part numbers; the part number for the fan blades installed on the accident engine was not included in the SB. As a result, an ultrasonic inspection of the fan blades on the accident engine was not required to be performed. In addition, at the time of the preliminary hazard list accident, the fan blades had accumulated 10,712 cycles since their last overhaul in October 2012. As part of that overhaul, an FPI was performed (as specified in the engine maintenance manual) to detect cracks, but the crack in fan blade No. 13 was not detected. The national transportation safety board could not determine why the crack was not detected; it is possible that the size of the crack might have been below the FPI detection threshold. After the PNS accident, CFM implemented, in November 2016, an ECI technique for the fan blade dovetail as part of the overhaul process. An ECI hardware accomplishment summary a higher sensitivity than an FPI and can detect cracks at or near the surface (unlike an FPI, which can only detect surface cracks). The national transportation safety board concludes that the low-cycle fatigue crack in the fan blade dovetail initiated because of higher-than-expected dovetail stresses under normal operating loads, and this crack was most likely not detectable during the FPI at the time of the fan blade set’s last overhaul and subsequent visual inspections at the time of fan blade relubrications. After the accident, the federal aviation administration issued automatic dependent surveillance to mandate initial and repetitive ultrasonic inspections of all fan blades on CFM56-7B engines. Ultrasonic inspections are currently required to be performed before a fan blade accumulates 17,000 flight cycles since new and repeated at intervals of no more than 1,600 flight cycles (the current interval between fan blade relubrications). CFM indicated that this repetitive ultrasonic inspection interval should provide multiple opportunities to detect a dovetail crack before it would reach a critical size that would allow the fan blade to separate. Thus, the crack on the fan blade dovetail would likely have been detected if the fan blade set on the accident engine had been required to undergo an ECI during the last overhaul and an ultrasonic inspection at each relubrication before the accident. In addition, after the preliminary hazard list accident, cracks were detected on multiple fan blades using ultrasonic inspections (as part of blade relubrications) or ECIs (during overhaul). Thus, the national transportation safety board concludes that the requirement to perform an ECI at the time of fan blade overhaul and an ultrasonic inspection at the time of blade relubrication should enable cracked fan blades in CFM56-7B engines to be detected and removed from service before the cracks reach a critical size and the blades fracture. 2.2.2 Inlet Departure During the development and certification of the CFM56-7B engine, eight FBO rig tests and two engine FBO containment certification tests (under Part 33) were conducted between January 1994 and December 1996. These tests were performed to define the FBO fragmentation, which included determining the mass, quantity, direction, and exit trajectory and velocity of the fan blade fragments. The tests were also performed to define the engine fan case loading and displacements, evaluate the fan case radial containment capability, and assess the response of the proposed production engine hardware. Although the FBO rig and containment certification tests were primarily intended to validate and certify engine hardware (and not airplane structure), a production-representative inlet was installed during one FBO rig test and the first of two engine FBO containment certification tests. Boeing used the requirements in Part 25 and Special Conditions 25-ANM-132 to develop an initial inlet design configuration. Boeing then incorporated modifications to the inlet design, based on the FBO rig and engine FBO containment certification test results, to ensure that the inlet could withstand the interface loads (that is, the loads on the interface between the fan case A1 flange and the inlet attach ring) resulting from an FBO event, the subsequent structural damage, and the associated post-FBO loads so that the airplane could continue to operate safely and land successfully. Boeing also performed certification structural analyses based on the FBO test results. The damage to the accident inlet, fan case, and recovered fan blade fragments showed that some aspects of the accident FBO event were consistent with the FBO tests and structural analyses that were conducted as part of the engine and airplane certifications. For example, during the accident FBO event, the fan blade tip and some fan blade mid-span fragments traveled forward of the fan case into the inlet, and the blade root and other fan blade mid-span fragments traveled aft within the fan case. Also, the fan case and the inlet containment shield remained intact, exhibited no pass-through penetrations, and performed as designed. In addition, the initial impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case caused high local fan case deformations, displacements, loads, internal stresses, and the subsequent formation of a high-energy displacement wave that traveled 360° circumferentially and forward and aft, all of which imparted additional deformations, displacements, loads, and internal stresses to the inlet. Despite these similarities, there were significant differences between the accident FBO event and the FBO tests and structural analyses performed as part of certification. One difference was that the fan blade fragments that went forward of the fan case and into the inlet during the accident FBO event had a different trajectory (a larger exit angle) and traveled beyond the containment shield. Another difference was that the inlet damage caused by these fan blade fragments was significantly greater than the amount of damage that was defined at the time of inlet certification. Boeing’s postaccident analyses of the inlet and its structural modeling of the inlet (using the FBO loads) found that the displacement wave damage—a 360° circumferential failure of the interface between the inlet aft bulkhead and the inlet attach ring—was not sufficient by itself to cause portions of the inlet to separate. Nevertheless, because of the failure of the aft bulkhead-to-inlet attach ring interface, the inner barrel was the only inlet structure still attached to the engine and the only structure capable of supporting the inlet loads. However, the inner barrel damage caused by the separated fan blade fragments reduced the structural integrity of the inner barrel such that it was unable to withstand the large internal stresses developed during the engine rundown. As a result, the residual strength of the inner barrel structure was exceeded, and the inner barrel failed, causing portions of the inlet to separate from the airplane. Boeing’s certification structural analyses indicated that the inner barrel should have been able to sustain the damage resulting from an FBO event, as documented during the certification tests, and remain intact, which was (and is currently) consistent with Boeing’s inlet design intent. The national transportation safety board concludes that the fan blade fragments that traveled forward of the fan case, along with the displacement wave created by the fan blade’s impact with the fan case, caused damage that compromised the structural integrity of the inlet and caused portions of the inlet to depart from the airplane. Although the amount of inlet damage caused by the displacement wave had previously been documented and analyzed, the amount of inlet damage caused by the forward-traveling fan blade fragments during the accident was not observed during engine FBO containment certification testing or accounted for in the certification structural analyses, which is discussed in section 2.3. 2.2.3 Fan Cowl Departure A fan cowl was not installed during the engine FBO containment certification test, per standard industry practice, to permit observation of the fan case and fan case-installed components during the test. As a result, Boeing used a NASTRAN finite element model to determine the FBO loads on the fan cowl for a fan blade released at the twelve o’clock position (the CFM-selected position) and then performed multiple analyses for this and other fan blade release locations and airplane conditions. The analyses employed the state-of-the-art technology at that time, which included the capability to assess the fan cowl structure under various loading conditions. The fan cowl was designed using the predicted loads, associated internal stresses, and the engine FBO containment certification test results. As part of the fan cowl’s design, a radial restraint fitting was added to the bottom of the inboard (right) fan cowl because of the asymmetric nature of the fan cowl halves, which was necessary to accommodate the requirements (in particular, the large diameter) of the CFM56-7B engine. An integral pin on the radial restraint fitting engages with a radial restraint bracket at the bottom of the fan case to help the fan cowl halves maintain their shape when joined together by the three latch assemblies at the bottom of each fan cowl half. An assessment of engine rundown loads (as part of the fan cowl’s certification structural analyses) determined that the load-carrying capability of the radial restraint fitting would be exceeded after an FBO event. Thus, the overall fan cowl certification loads were calculated with the assumption that the radial restraint fitting would completely fail immediately after an FBO event and provide no path for transmitting loads to the fan cowl structure. As a result, the certification structural analyses indicated that the fan cowl would remain attached to the airplane after an FBO event and throughout the rest of the flight, which was (and is currently) consistent with Boeing’s fan cowl design intent. During the accident FBO event, the fan cowl fractured, and portions of the fan cowl departed the airplane. After the accident, Boeing used the damage to the recovered fan cowl hardware, the fan case impact damage, and the predicted interface loads for the accident condition to model the fan cowl damage sequence and perform a progressive failure analysis. This analysis, as well as other Boeing postaccident analyses, found that the fan cowl structure is more sensitive and more likely to fail when a separated fan blade impacts the fan case near the six o’clock position (the bottom of the engine), which occurred during the preliminary hazard list accident, than at the twelve o’clock FBO release position used during the engine FBO containment certification tests. The fan cowl’s higher sensitivity and greater susceptibility of failure from loads resulting from an FBO impact near the six o’clock position were due to the proximity of this FBO impact location to the radial restraint fitting, as shown in figure 21. If the radial restraint fitting does not completely fail or disengage immediately after an FBO event (as designed), the fitting would be capable of transmitting loads from the fan case to the fan cowl. Postaccident examination of the radial restraint bracket on the fan case found evidence of deformation, bushing flange damage, and a roller contact mark, which were consistent with the pin disengaging. However, damage observed on the inboard fan cowl indicated that, before and after the pin disengaged, load was transmitted to the fan cowl through the radial restraint bracket and fitting, both of which remained mostly intact and in contact. During the accident sequence, the separated fan blade’s impact with the fan case near the six o’clock position transmitted FBO-generated impact loads through the radial restraint fitting into the fan cowl structure, causing the fan cowl to deform and fracture. These transmitted loads were greater than originally predicted based on the assumption of a completely failed radial restraint fitting that provided no load path to the fan cowl. Thus, the transmitted loads and associated stresses were not accounted for in the structural analyses performed as part of certification, which is further discussed in section 2.3. The loads imparted through the radial restraint fitting into the fan cowl structure also created skin cracks in the lower part of the fan cowl that propagated (during the engine surge and rundown phases) until the three latch assembly load paths failed, the fan cowl halves disengaged from each other, and portions of the fan cowl departed the airplane. Boeing’s postaccident analysis of the fan cowl (which was conducted using modeling tools that were not available at the time of certification) determined that the impact loads and associated stresses from the released fan blade after reaching the fan cowl structure caused the residual strength of the damaged fan cowl structure to be exceeded. The national transportation safety board concludes that portions of the fan cowl departed the airplane because (1) the impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case imparted significant loads into the fan cowl through the radial restraint fitting and (2) the associated stresses in the fan cowl structure exceeded the residual strength of the fan cowl, causing its failure. One portion of the fan cowl that was recovered after the accident was the inboard aft latch keeper. The left side of the fuselage near the location of the missing cabin window (adjacent to seat 14A) had impact damage and witness marks that were consistent with the size and shape of the inboard aft latch keeper and surrounding fan cowl structure, as shown in figure 6. The skin stresses associated with loads transmitted to the fan cowl through the radial restraint fitting resulted in fractures initiating around the latches on the inboard fan cowl. These fractures eventually caused the inboard fan cowl structure surrounding the aft and middle latch keepers to separate. The separation of the forward latch assembly quickly followed, which allowed the fan cowls to open. The aft latch assembly (the latch keeper and latch hook) remained engaged as aerospace information report loads caused both fan cowl halves to continue to open, and the aft latch keeper (on the inboard fan cowl), its surrounding support structure, and part of the inboard fan cowl skin were flung up and over the engine and the left wing. The aft latch assembly then separated, and the inboard fan cowl piece with the aft latch keeper impacted the fuselage near the window by seat 14A, as shown in figure 22. The national transportation safety board concludes that the impact of the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper with the fuselage near the cabin window adjacent to seat 14A caused the window to depart the airplane, the rapid depressurization of the cabin, and the passenger fatality. As of October 31, 2019, the PNS and preliminary hazard list accidents were the only known CFM56-7B full-length fan blade failure occurrences. During both accident sequences, the operational conditions, including the airplanes’ altitude and airspeed, the engines’ fan speed, and the fan blades’ impact energy, were similar. For the PNS accident, the FBO event caused most of the left engine inlet to depart the airplane and portions of the inlet to impact the left fuselage, leaving a 16-by-5-inch through-puncture just below two cabin windows and resulting in a depressurization. However, the fan cowl halves remained latched together and attached to the airplane. The fan case impact location for the PNS accident was between the three and four o’clock positions (aft looking forward). For the preliminary hazard list accident, the location where the separated fan blade impacted the fan case—near the six o’clock position—was ultimately more critical to the structural integrity and performance of the fan cowl structure. The substantial loads transmitted into the fan cowl structure from an FBO impact near the bottom of the fan case light-emitting diode to fan cowl damage that allowed the cowl halves to disengage from each other. In addition to the damage to the structure by the window near seat 14A, other structures (including the left wing and the left horizontal stabilizer) were damaged by departing inlet and fan cowl parts. The circumstances of this accident indicated the potential for other Boeing 737NG-series airplanes (the 737-600, -700, -800, and -900) to receive significant damage resulting from an FBO event if the fan blade impact occurred at a critical location. The national transportation safety board concludes that this accident demonstrated the susceptibility of the fan cowl installed on Boeing 737NG-series airplanes to an FBO impact location near the radial restraint fitting and the effects of such an impact on the structural integrity of the fan cowl. It is important that the interaction of the fan case, radial restraint fitting, and fan cowl during an FBO event be well understood to preclude a failure of the fan cowl structure. Therefore, the national transportation safety board recommends that the federal aviation administration require Boeing to determine the critical fan blade impact location(s) on the CFM56-7B engine fan case and redesign the fan cowl structure on all Boeing 737NG-series airplanes to ensure the structural integrity of the fan cowl after an FBO event. The national transportation safety board also recommends that, once the actions requested in Safety Recommendation A-19-17 are completed, the federal aviation administration require Boeing to install the redesigned fan cowl structure on new-production 737NG-series airplanes. The national transportation safety board further recommends that, once the actions requested in Safety Recommendation A-19-17 are completed, the federal aviation administration require operators of Boeing 737NG-series airplanes to retrofit their airplanes with the redesigned fan cowl structure. This investigation revealed the concept of a critical location for an FBO impact and its effect on the structural integrity of the engine nacelle and its components (which include the inlet, fan cowl, and thrust reversers). Other engine/airframe combinations may also be sensitive to the location of an FBO impact and have unintended load paths and/or loads that are greater than those accounted for in structural analyses. No federal aviation administration regulation (including those discussed in section 1.3.5.3) currently requires manufacturers, as part of the design of the nacelle structure, to account for critical FBO impact locations in all engine operating conditions. Therefore, the national transportation safety board recommends that the federal aviation administration expand the 14 code of federal regulations Part 25 and 33 certification requirements to mandate that airplane and engine manufacturers work collaboratively to (1) analyze all critical fan blade impact locations for all engine operating conditions, the resulting fan blade fragmentation, and the effects of the FBO-generated loads on the nacelle structure and (2) develop a method to ensure that the analysis findings are fully accounted for in the design of the nacelle structure and its components. In addition, the national transportation safety board recommends that european aviation safety agency expand its certification requirements for transport-category airplanes and aircraft engines to mandate that airplane and engine manufacturers work collaboratively to (1) analyze all critical fan blade impact locations for all engine operating conditions, the resulting fan blade fragmentation, and the effects of the FBO-generated loads on the nacelle structure and (2) develop a method to ensure that the analysis findings are fully accounted for in the design of the nacelle structure and its components. 2.3 Certification Summary CFM conducted two engine FBO containment certification tests to meet the requirements of section 33.94, Blade Containment and Rotor Unbalance Tests. As part of these requirements, CFM had to demonstrate that (1) the engine case would be capable of containing damage without catching fire and without failure of the engine mounting attachments when the engine was operated for at least 15 seconds after an FBO event and (2) the engine could be successfully shut down, or the damage could result in a self-shutdown of the engine. The tests were successfully completed, and the engine was certificated in December 1996. CFM provided data from the engine FBO containment certification tests (and the engine FBO rig tests) to Boeing to use in the design of the inlet and fan cowl. Boeing then performed structural analyses to assess how the inlet, fan cowl, and other airplane structures would respond to an FBO event. These analyses, which included finite element models, were performed using the state-of-the-art analytical modeling tools that were available at the time. Boeing used the available test data (which included test damage documentation) and the results of the subsequent analyses to design the airplane structure to withstand an initial fan blade release and subsequent damage as a result of an FBO event and ensure that the airplane would be capable of safe flight and landing. Boeing’s design philosophy was that the failure of an engine fan blade and any resulting damage should not cause the inlet, fan cowl, or their components to separate and present a hazard to the airplane. In December 1997, the airplane structure was certificated in accordance with the requirements of Part 25. Given the available test data, the subsequent structural analyses, and the analytical modeling tools available at the time that the engine and the airplane were certificated, the effects of an FBO event were assumed to have been well defined. However, as stated in sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3, FBO-related events occurred during the accident sequence that were not anticipated or accounted for in the structural analyses, including the following: •the fan blade fragments that traveled forward of the fan case had a trajectory angle (relative to the circumferential direction) that was greater than that observed during the engine FBO containment certification tests; •the inlet damage caused by the forward-traveling fan blade fragments was greater than that observed during the engine FBO containment certification tests and accounted for in the certification analyses; •FBO-generated loads were transmitted to the fan cowl through the radial restraint fitting, which was not accounted for in the fan cowl’s design; and •the stresses in the fan cowl were greater than those calculated in the certification analyses. The engine FBO containment certification tests were intended to demonstrate the engine’s radial containment capability under the most critical engine operating conditions, including the maximum permissible rotor speed (per section 33.94) and the peak operational stresses and temperature. The tests were not intended to demonstrate or account for all possible operating conditions or the effects that various fan blade impact locations could have on the airplane structure. The national transportation safety board concludes that, given the results of CFM’s engine FBO containment certification tests and Boeing’s subsequent structural analyses of the effects of an FBO event on the airframe, the post-FBO events that occurred during this accident could not have been predicted. New technologies and analytical methods have been developed since the CFM56-7B engine and the Boeing 737-700 airplane were certificated. These technologies and methods are currently being used by engine and airframe manufacturers to more effectively model an FBO event, correlate test and analysis results, and predict the damages and stress levels associated with various fan blade release locations and operating conditions. As part of this investigation, Boeing and CFM jointly developed analytical models using the most recent state-of-the-art methods to predict, confirm, and correlate the behavior of the CFM56-7B engine and the 737-700 airplane structure during the accident FBO event. The analytical models considered the operating conditions that the accident engine, inlet, and fan cowl experienced when the fan blade separation occurred as well as the certification test results. The most recent state-of-the-art methods enabled assessments of the effects of the fan blade fragments’ impact with the fan case, the effects of the resulting displacement wave, the progressive failure of the inlet and the fan cowl, and the relationship between the inlet and fan cowl failure sequences, as discussed in sections 1.3.7.2 and 1.3.7.3. The national transportation safety board recognizes that the effects of the fan blade fragments’ impact with the fan case and the resulting displacement wave were also modeled as part of the Boeing 737-700 airplane certification. However, the structural analysis modeling tools associated with the postaccident analyses had advanced technological capabilities that had not been developed at the time of certification. Among other things, the advanced capabilities enabled analyses that captured the incremental effects (during a very short period of time) of an FBO event, which made the analyses more predictive and representative of actual operating conditions. The national transportation safety board concludes that the structural analysis modeling tools that currently exist to analyze an FBO event and predict the subsequent engine and airframe damage will allow airplane manufacturers to better understand the interaction of the engine and airframe during an FBO event and the response of the inlet, fan cowl, and associated structures in the airplane’s normal operating envelope. 2.4 Operational Factors 2.4.1 Checklist Performance At the time of the engine failure (1103:33), the first officer was the pilot flying, and the captain was the pilot monitoring. flight data recorder data showed that the left engine’s thrust lever was moved to the idle position 25 seconds after the engine failure occurred (1103:58) and that the engine start lever was moved to the fuel cutoff position 11 seconds later (1104:09). At 1109:30, the captain indicated that she would assume the role of the pilot flying and that the first officer (as the pilot monitoring) should begin the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation non-normal checklist (shown in figure 17). The flight crew began the formal execution of that checklist at 1109:52, which was about 6 minutes after the time of the engine failure. However, between the time of the engine failure and the start of the checklist, the flight crew was primarily focused on maintaining airplane control during the emergency descent, navigating toward an emergency landing airport, and communicating with ATC. Further, guidance in the SWA 737NG quick reference handbook states that “non-normal checklist use starts when the aircraft flight path and configuration are correctly established...usually time is available to assess the situations before corrective action is started.” The 14-item Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist did not have any immediate action (memory) items. Nevertheless, the flight crew recognized the two checklist items that needed to be immediately performed: moving the left engine’s thrust lever to the idle position (step 2) and moving the engine start lever to the fuel cutoff position (step 3). The cockpit voice recorder showed that the first five checklist items were completed by 1111:00, which was 1 minute 8 seconds after the checklist was initiated. The last item that the flight crew accomplished on this checklist was to start the auxiliary power unit (step 10), which occurred about 6.5 minutes (1116:16) after the checklist began. The remaining items on the checklist were to balance the fuel (as needed), change the transponder mode selector from “TA/RA” (traffic advisory/resolution advisory) to “TA,” change the isolation valve switch to auto, and plan to land at the nearest suitable airport. The national transportation safety board notes that, although the flight crew did not discuss the plan to land at the nearest suitable airport as part of the checklist (step 14), the crewmembers had discussed, between themselves and with ATC, landing at preliminary hazard list before initiating the checklist. The flight crew’s nonperformance of the other three items on the checklist had no adverse effect on the outcome of the emergency. The flight crew did not call for or complete (using the standard checklist procedure) the three other non-normal checklists that applied to the circumstances of this accident: the One Engine Inoperative Landing checklist, which is required after the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist; the Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization checklist, which is required if the cabin altitude warning light or horn annunciates; and the Emergency Descent checklist, which is required by a step in the Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization checklist. However, the captain was permitted to deviate from normal procedures, including the performance of checklists, in an emergency situation. Section 121.557, Emergencies: Domestic and Flag Operations, states the following in paragraph (a): In an emergency situation that requires immediate decision and action the pilot in command may take any action that [the pilot] considers necessary under the circumstances. In such a case [the pilot] may deviate from prescribed operations procedures and methods, weather minimums, and this chapter, to the extent required in the interests of safety. SWA’s Flight Operations Manual, section 5.1.4, provides the following similar information: In an emergency situation that requires immediate decision and action, the Captain may take any action necessary under the circumstances. In such a case, the Captain may deviate from Southwest Airlines’ operations procedures and methods, weather minimums, and regulations to the extent required in the interests of safety. The One Engine Inoperative Landing non-normal checklist (shown in figure 18) had no immediate action items. The first item on the checklist instructed the flight crew to plan for a flaps 15 landing. However, because of airplane controllability concerns, the captain decided to conduct a flaps 5 landing to ensure that the airplane’s airspeed would not get too slow. Even though the checklist and the Aircraft Operating Manual indicated that a flaps 15 landing should be conducted with one engine inoperative, the decision to conduct a flaps 5 landing was within the captain’s authority. The flight crew’s nonperformance of this checklist had no adverse effect on the outcome of the emergency. The Cabin Altitude Warning or Rapid Depressurization non-normal checklist (shown in figure 19) had two immediate action items—don oxygen masks and set regulators to 100% (step 1) and establish crew communications (step 2)—that the flight crew performed from memory. The cockpit voice recorder recorded sounds consistent with breathing through oxygen masks at 1104:49, which was 1 minute 16 seconds after the engine failure occurred, but the flight crewmembers might have donned their oxygen masks before then given that the cockpit voice recorder recorded unintelligible cockpit communications between 1103:42 and 1104:41. During postaccident interviews, the crewmembers reported some initial confusion about the position of the switch that allowed them to communicate through a microphone in their oxygen mask. According to cockpit voice recorder information, at 1104:54, the flight crewmembers had established communications through their oxygen masks. The nonperformance of the next three items on the checklist, which were quick reference (time-sensitive) items, as well as the deferred items after checklist completion had no adverse effect on the outcome of the emergency. The Emergency Descent non-normal checklist (shown in figure 20) had three quick reference (time-sensitive) items that the flight crew performed independently of the checklist. (The checklist had no immediate action items.) First, the checklist indicated that the flight crew should advise the flight attendants and air traffic control about the emergency descent (step 1), and the cockpit voice recorder recorded the captain stating to ATC, at 1104:54, “Southwest thirteen eighty hardware accomplishment summary an engine fire descending.” Second, the checklist stated that the airplane should descend, without delay, to 10,000 ft or the lowest safe altitude, whichever is higher (step 3). flight data recorder data showed that, 25 seconds after the engine failure and 8 seconds after the airplane’s roll attitude was generally back under the pilots’ control, the emergency descent started, and the airplane descended through 10,000 ft about 8 minutes after the emergency descent began. Last, the checklist indicated that both thrust levers should be moved so that thrust is reduced to minimum (step 5), and the flight data recorder showed that both thrust levers were moved to the idle position 25 seconds after the engine failure. Given the emergency situation caused by the engine failure, the resulting airplane damage, and the rapid depressurization, the nonperformance of all but one of the remaining items on the checklist did not affect the situation. The one item on this checklist that could have affected the situation involved the deployment of the speedbrakes to the flight detent position (step 6) because that could have allowed a more rapid descent without additional airspeed (which the captain was avoiding due to airplane vibration) and could have facilitated a quicker landing at MDT, which was the geographically closer airport at the time. (The flight crew’s selection of preliminary hazard list as the emergency landing airport is discussed in the next section.) However, the time that might have been saved would not likely have changed the outcome of the emergency. In addition, speedbrake deployment could have negatively impacted the aerodynamics of the damaged engine and wing, which would have caused additional stability and control issues for the flight crew. During postaccident interviews, the captain and the first officer indicated that they were focused on maintaining control of the airplane, which was the first action listed in SWA’s Flight Operations Manual for all non-normal situations (see section 1.9.1). Maintaining airplane control was the most critical demand placed on the flight crew once the emergency situation occurred. Specifically, the crew had to control an airplane that had lost thrust on the left side and was simultaneously experiencing greatly increased drag on the same side because of the damage that resulted from the engine failure. Also, immediately after the engine failure, the airplane entered a rapid roll to the left, which reached 41.3° within 11 seconds, and experienced positive and negative vertical accelerations. flight data recorder data showed that significant control input forces in all three axes of flight were necessary to maintain control of the damaged airplane. In addition to maintaining airplane control, communications with ATC—beyond those related to headings, altitudes, and clearances—imposed demands on a task-saturated flight crew (even though the intent of those communications was to provide assistance to the crew and follow air traffic control procedures). For example, according to cockpit voice recorder information, during the 17 minutes between the time of the engine failure and the time that the airplane landed, the crew was given four frequency changes. Also, air traffic control asked the crew multiple times to state the following: the nature of the emergency, including whether the engine was on fire; the number of occupants aboard; the amount fuel on board (which the flight crew provided in hours and was then asked to provide in pounds); and the aircraft rescue and firefighting support that would be needed after landing. Even with the additional demands placed on the flight crew as a result of the engine failure, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the first officer’s concern about performing checklists. Specifically, at 1111:45, the first officer stated, “we’re gonna need a few minutes right? To run a couple checklists? Is that right?” The captain replied, 4 seconds later, “nope, just keep goin’.” Also, the first officer stated, at 1113:51, “we got a couple of checklists to run.” However, at 1115:54, after learning about the passenger injury, the captain stated, “let’s get it turned in.” During a postaccident interview, the captain stated that she had initially requested a long final approach to allow time to accomplish checklists but then decided to expedite the approach due to the passenger injury. The national transportation safety board concludes that performing required checklists according to standard operating procedures is a critical part of safe flight operations. However, given the emergency situation aboard this flight, the flight crew’s performance of most, but not all, of the items on the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation non-normal checklist and the nonperformance of the three other relevant non-normal checklists allowed the crew to appropriately balance the procedural requirement of executing checklists with the high workload associated with maintaining airplane control and accomplishing a safe and timely descent and landing. 2.4.2 Emergency Landing Airport Selection At 1105:07 (1 minute 34 seconds after the engine failure), after learning about the emergency situation aboard the airplane, the center controller asked the flight crewmembers which airport they would like to divert to, and the captain stated, “give us a vector for your closest.” The air traffic control transcript showed that the controller suggested MDT, but the cockpit voice recorder did not record most of this transmission. Thus, it is possible that the flight crew did not hear the controller’s suggestion to divert to MDT, especially given the increased background noise recorded on the cockpit voice recorder and the significant airplane vibration reported during flight crew postaccident interviews. Six seconds after the captain requested a vector to the closest airport, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the controller providing the vector to MDT. Three seconds later, the cockpit voice recorder recorded the captain acknowledging the vector and stating, “we’re looking at ah Philly.” Afterward, the controller cleared the airplane direct to PHL. The straight-line distance to preliminary hazard list (57 nm) was about twice the distance to MDT (29 nm) based on the airplane’s location at the time of the engine failure. The captain stated, during a postaccident interview, that she was unable to conduct the emergency descent at the recommended speed (VMO) due to airplane vibration. The reduced airspeed resulted in a descent rate that would not have significantly affected the time needed to land at either MDT or PHL. Although the airplane would have traveled a shorter distance to MDT than it did to preliminary hazard list (because MDT was geographically closer at the time), the time required to descend from FL320 would basically have been the same regardless of whether MDT or preliminary hazard list was the emergency landing airport. flight data recorder data showed a near-continuous descent from FL320 to preliminary hazard list with no intermediate level-off altitudes, which was a desirable descent profile for the emergency situation. The last step of the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation checklist instructed flight crews to plan to land at the nearest suitable airport. Regarding the “nearest suitable airport” reference, the SWA 737NG quick reference handbook defined “nearest airport” as the “nearest airport in point of time” and “suitable airport” as “the most suitable airport to handle the non-normal situation.” It is noteworthy that the quick reference handbook definition of nearest airport included “in point of time” and that the national transportation safety board found that the difference in time for landing at MDT or preliminary hazard list was negligible. In addition, the quick reference handbook included “On-line versus Off-line Airport” as one of the factors to be evaluated when determining airport suitability. preliminary hazard list was an on-line airport for SWA (that is, an airport to and from which SWA provides service) and, as such, could provide greater operational and customer service support compared with an off-line airport (such as MDT). preliminary hazard list had two other characteristics that made it a more suitable airport than MDT for this emergency situation. First, preliminary hazard list had four runways, whereas MDT had one runway, and the longest runway at preliminary hazard list was 2,000 ft longer than the runway at MDT. Second, preliminary hazard list was an aircraft rescue and firefighting index E airport, indicating the highest level of aircraft rescue and firefighting capabilities under section 139.317, whereas MDT had a lower aircraft rescue and firefighting index (B). Both the Federal Aviation Regulations and SWA’s written policy (see section 1.9.1) gave the crew broad discretion to choose an emergency landing airport based on the immediate operational and safety concerns. During a postaccident interview, the first officer stated that he looked at a map, determined that preliminary hazard list was a close suitable airport, and pointed out that information to the captain. The national transportation safety board concludes that the flight crew’s decision to land at preliminary hazard list was appropriate given the airplane’s location at the time of the emergency, the circumstances of the emergency, and the airport’s multiple runways and aircraft rescue and firefighting capabilities. 2.5 Occupant Safety During Emergency Landings Even with the loud conditions in the cabin, all three flight attendants reported that they heard the captain’s process assurance announcement at 1105:52 indicating that the airplane was diverting to PHL. Direct contact between the flight attendants and the flight crew was established at 1115:04 (about 5.5 minutes before landing). During the conversation, a flight attendant asked, “are we almost there?” and the first officer stated, “we’re gonna land as soon as we can.” At 1115:45, the flight attendant advised the passengers “we are almost landing” and, about 1 minute later, “we are almost there.” Although the flight attendants were aware of the imminent landing, none was in her assigned jumpseat in preparation for the landing. Flight attendant A, who was assigned to the forward entry door position, stated that she did not have time to return to her jumpseat, so she static air temperature on the aisle floor near row 4 or 5, and seated passengers held her down. Flight attendant B, who was assigned to the aft galley position, stated that she static air temperature on the floor in the aft galley with seated passengers holding her down during landing. Flight attendant C, who was assigned to the forward galley door position, stated that she also static air temperature on the floor in the aft galley. SWA training personnel stated that flight attendants were instructed that they needed to be in their jumpseat during landing because it was the “safest, most secure place for them,” especially if an airplane evacuation was necessary. Guidance in the company’s flight attendant manual reinforced that flight attendants needed to be seated in their assigned jumpseats with their seat belts and shoulder harnesses fastened for every takeoff and landing. The manual also stated that, during a planned emergency landing, flight attendants must occupy their jumpseats. SWA acknowledged that it was acceptable for a flight attendant to be out of an assigned jumpseat for landing in limited situations, including providing first airport information desk in a life-threatening medical situation. However, for this event, first airport information desk for the injured passenger was being administered by medically qualified passengers. The emergency landing occurred with good weather and during daytime conditions, so routine cues associated with an imminent landing (the airplane’s descent and configuration for landing) would have been available to the flight attendants before they static air temperature on the floor of the cabin. The flight attendants’ brace commands to passengers (“heads down, stay down”), which began 19 seconds before landing, demonstrated that the flight attendants understood that landing was imminent. However, because the flight attendants were not secured in their assigned jumpseats, they could have been injured if an adverse landing event (such as a runway excursion) had occurred, which could have hindered the flight attendants’ ability to rapidly evacuate the airplane. This emergency situation involved an airplane with an unknown amount of damage and minimal contact with the flight crewmembers, who were busy controlling the airplane and performing other related tasks. As a result, once the injured passenger began receiving first airport information desk from medically qualified passengers, the flight attendants should have focused on securing the cabin and themselves for the emergency landing and preparing themselves for the possibility of an evacuation. The national transportation safety board concludes that, although not a factor in the outcome of this accident, the flight attendants should have been properly restrained in their assigned jumpseats in case an emergency evacuation after landing was necessary. The national transportation safety board recognizes that the accident flight was challenging for all of the crewmembers because of the acute emergency situation involving trauma, airplane damage, depressurization, noise, communication challenges, and time pressure. However, it is important to remind flight attendants of the challenges of managing an emergency situation while maintaining readiness to perform a rapid evacuation, which is a flight attendant’s most critical responsibility. The NTSB’s postaccident discussions with SWA revealed that the operator hardware accomplishment summary not incorporated the lessons learned from this accident in its initial and recurrent flight attendant training programs. Therefore, the national transportation safety board recommends that SWA include the lessons learned from the accident involving Southwest Airlines flight 1380 in initial and recurrent flight attendant training, emphasizing the importance of being secured in a jumpseat during emergency landings. The accident flight was full, with no open cabin seats remaining, and the flight attendants needed to reseat the passengers in seats 14B and 14C so that the injured passenger (in seat 14A) could receive medical care. Both affected passengers went to the aft galley; one passenger static air temperature on the flight attendant aft jumpseat, and the other static air temperature on the floor. (The other aft jumpseat was occupied by an SWA company employee.) The SWA flight attendant manual included numerous references about reseating passengers but did not address a situation in which no additional seats were available. Postaccident interviews with SWA training personnel revealed that options for reseating passengers aboard a full flight had not been adequately considered as part of safety risk management. A review of federal aviation administration regulations, ACs, and Order 8900.1 (Flight Standards Information Management System) did not identify any specific guidance addressing options for reseating passengers when no additional passenger seats are available. The national transportation safety board concludes that federal aviation administration guidance addressing options for reseating passengers if an in-flight loss of seating capacity were to occur would help aerospace information report carriers implement procedures to address this situation. Therefore, the national transportation safety board recommends that the federal aviation administration develop and issue guidance on ways that aerospace information report carriers can mitigate hazards to passengers affected by an in-flight loss of seating capacity. 3. Conclusions 3.1 Findings •None of the following were factors in this accident: (1) flight crew qualifications, which were in accordance with US regulations; (2) flight crew medical conditions; (3) the airworthiness of the airplane before the left engine failure occurred; and (4) Southwest Airlines’ maintenance of the airplane. •The low-cycle fatigue crack in the fan blade dovetail initiated because of higher-than-expected dovetail stresses under normal operating loads, and this crack was most likely not detectable during the fluorescent penetrant inspection at the time of the fan blade set’s last overhaul and subsequent visual inspections at the time of fan blade relubrications. •The requirement to perform an eddy current inspection at the time of fan blade overhaul and an ultrasonic inspection at the time of blade relubrication should enable cracked fan blades in CFM56-7B engines to be detected and removed from service before the cracks reach a critical size and the blades fracture. •The fan blade fragments that traveled forward of the fan case, along with the displacement wave created by the fan blade’s impact with the fan case, caused damage that compromised the structural integrity of the inlet and caused portions of the inlet to depart from the airplane. •Portions of the fan cowl departed the airplane because (1) the impact of the separated fan blade with the fan case imparted significant loads into the fan cowl through the radial restraint fitting and (2) the associated stresses in the fan cowl structure exceeded the residual strength of the fan cowl, causing its failure. •The impact of the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper with the fuselage near the cabin window adjacent to seat 14A caused the window to depart the airplane, the rapid depressurization of the cabin, and the passenger fatality. •This accident demonstrated the susceptibility of the fan cowl installed on Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes to a fan-blade-out impact location near the radial restraint fitting and the effects of such an impact on the structural integrity of the fan cowl. •Given the results of CFM’s engine fan-blade-out (FBO) containment certification tests and Boeing’s subsequent structural analyses of the effects of an FBO event on the airframe, the post-FBO events that occurred during this accident could not have been predicted. •The structural analysis modeling tools that currently exist to analyze a fan-blade-out (FBO) event and predict the subsequent engine and airframe damage will allow airplane manufacturers to better understand the interaction of the engine and airframe during an FBO event and the response of the inlet, fan cowl, and associated structures in the airplane’s normal operating envelope. •Performing required checklists according to standard operating procedures is a critical part of safe flight operations. However, given the emergency situation aboard this flight, the flight crew’s performance of most, but not all, of the items on the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation non-normal checklist and the nonperformance of the three other relevant non-normal checklists allowed the crew to appropriately balance the procedural requirement of executing checklists with the high workload associated with maintaining airplane control and accomplishing a safe and timely descent and landing. •The flight crew’s decision to land at Philadelphia International Airport was appropriate given the airplane’s location at the time of the emergency, the circumstances of the emergency, and the airport’s multiple runways and aircraft rescue and firefighting capabilities. •Although not a factor in the outcome of this accident, the flight attendants should have been properly restrained in their assigned jumpseats in case an emergency evacuation after landing was necessary. •Federal Aviation Administration guidance addressing options for reseating passengers if an in-flight loss of seating capacity were to occur would help aerospace information report carriers implement procedures to address this situation. 3.2 Probable Cause The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this accident was a low-cycle fatigue crack in the dovetail of fan blade No. 13, which resulted in the fan blade separating in flight and impacting the engine fan case at a location that was critical to the structural integrity and performance of the fan cowl structure. This impact light-emitting diode to the in-flight separation of fan cowl components, including the inboard fan cowl aft latch keeper, which struck the fuselage near a cabin window and caused the window to depart from the airplane, the cabin to rapidly depressurize, and the passenger fatality. 4. Recommendations To the Federal Aviation Administration Require Boeing to determine the critical fan blade impact location(s) on the CFM56-7B engine fan case and redesign the fan cowl structure on all Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes to ensure the structural integrity of the fan cowl after a fan-blade-out event. (A-19-17) Once the actions requested in Safety Recommendation A-19-17 are completed, require Boeing to install the redesigned fan cowl structure on new-production 737 next-generation-series airplanes. (A-19-18) Once the actions requested in Safety Recommendation A-19-17 are completed, require operators of Boeing 737 next-generation-series airplanes to retrofit their airplanes with the redesigned fan cowl structure. (A-19-19) Expand the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 25 and 33 certification requirements to mandate that airplane and engine manufacturers work collaboratively to (1) analyze all critical fan blade impact locations for all engine operating conditions, the resulting fan blade fragmentation, and the effects of the fan-blade-out-generated loads on the nacelle structure and (2) develop a method to ensure that the analysis findings are fully accounted for in the design of the nacelle structure and its components. (A-19-20) Develop and issue guidance on ways that aerospace information report carriers can mitigate hazards to passengers affected by an in-flight loss of seating capacity. (A-19-21) To Southwest Airlines Include the lessons learned from the accident involving Southwest Airlines flight 1380 in initial and recurrent flight attendant training, emphasizing the importance of being secured in a jumpseat during emergency landings. (A-19-22) To the European Aviation Safety Agency Expand your certification requirements for transport-category airplanes and aircraft engines to mandate that airplane and engine manufacturers work collaboratively to (1) analyze all critical fan blade impact locations for all engine operating conditions, the resulting fan blade fragmentation, and the effects of the fan-blade-out-generated loads on the nacelle structure and (2) develop a method to ensure that the analysis findings are fully accounted for in the design of the nacelle structure and its components. (A-19-23) BY THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD ROBERT L. SUMWALT, III Chairman BRUCE LANDSBERG Vice Chairman JENNIFER HOMENDY Member Adopted: November 19, 2019 5. Appendixes Appendix A: Investigation and Hearing The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) was notified of this accident about 1307 eastern daylight time on April 17, 2018. An investigative team arrived at Philadelphia International Airport (PHL), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, about 1630 that day. Chairman Robert Sumwalt accompanied the team to PHL. On-scene investigative groups were formed in the areas of operations, powerplants, structures, and survival factors. Specialists were assigned to perform the readout of the cockpit voice recorder and the flight data recorder at the NTSB’s laboratory in Washington, DC. Specialists in the areas of meteorology, maintenance records, aerospace information report traffic control, and metallurgy also supported the investigation. Parties to the investigation were the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Boeing, CFM International, Southwest Airlines (SWA), Southwest Airlines Pilots Association, Collins Aerospace (formerly universal time coordinate Aerospace Systems), Transport Workers Union Local 556, and Aircraft Mechanics Fraternal Association. In accordance with the provisions of Annex 13 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, the Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses pour la Sécurité de l’Aviation Civile (BEA), the NTSB’s counterpart agency in France, participated in the investigation as the accredited representative of the state of design and manufacture for the engines, and Safran Aircraft Engines participated in the investigation as a technical advisor to the BEA. The national transportation safety board held an investigative hearing for this accident on November 14, 2018. Issues discussed at the hearing included CFM56-7-series engine fan blade design and development history, CFM56-7-series engine fan blade inspection methods and procedures, and engine fan-blade-out containment design and certification criteria. Parties to the hearing were the FAA, Boeing, CFM International, SWA, and universal time coordinate Aerospace Systems. References european aviation safety agency (European Aviation Safety Agency). 2018a. “Airworthiness Directive; CFM International S.A. CFM56-7B engines,” March 26. https://ad.easa.europa.eu/ad/2018-007 ———. 2018b. “Emergency Airworthiness Directive; CFM International S.A. CFM56-7B engines,” April 20. https://ad.easa.europa.eu/ad/2018-0093-E ———. 2018c. “Airworthiness Directives CFM International S.A. CFM56-7B engine,” May 17. https://ad.easa.europa.eu/ad/2018-0109 ———. 2018d. “Airworthiness Directive; CFM International S.A. CFM56-7B engine,” September 28. https://ad.easa.europa.eu/ad/2018-0211. ———. 2019. “Airworthiness Directive; CFM International S.A. CFM56-7B engine,” January 30. https://ad.easa.europa.eu/blob/EASA_AD_2019_0018.pdf/AD_2019-0018_1. federal aviation administration (Federal Aviation Administration). 2017. “Airworthiness Directives; CFM International S.A. Turbofan Engines,” Federal Register, August 25:40516. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2017-08-25/pdf/2017-17828.pdf ———. 2018a. Emergency Airworthiness Directive, 2018-09-51, April 20. http://rgl.faa.gov/Regulatory_and_Guidance_Library/rgad.nsf/0/6de148fe35ddeddb8625827500759aa4/$FILE/2018-09-51_Emergency.pdf ———. 2018b. “Airworthiness Directives; CFM International S.A. Turbofan Engines,” Federal Register, May 2: 19176. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2018-05-02/pdf/2018-09338.pdf ———. 2018c. “Airworthiness Directives; CFM International S.A. Turbofan Engines,” Federal Register, May 17: 22836. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2018-05-17/pdf/2018-10657.pdf ———. 2018d. “Airworthiness Directives; CFM International S.A. Turbofan Engines,”Federal Register, October 1: 49272. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2018-10-01/pdf/2018-21245.pdf ———. 2018e. “Airworthiness Directives; CFM International S.A. Turbofan Engines,” Federal Register, December 26: 66090. http://rgl.faa.gov/Regulatory_and_Guidance_Library/rgad.nsf/0/032d7aeb37e59cd68625837e005b6343/$FILE/2018-26-01.pdf national transportation safety board (National Transportation Safety Board). 2013. Rapid Decompression Due to Fuselage Rupture, Southwest Airlines Flight 812, Boeing 737-3H4, N632SW, Yuma, Arizona, April 1, 2011. AAB-13/02. Washington, DC: NTSB.