Title: The Federal Aviation Administration Industry Guide to Product Certification – Second Edition Author(s): AIA, GAMA, Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Service Category: Guidande Tags: Certification, Aviation, Plan. Guidance CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION A. PURPOSE The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification contains a description of the purpose and vision of the improved certification process, hereinafter referred to as Certification Process Improvement (CPI). It also includes an overview of the Phases for product certification including the process flow and a detailed description of Key Player’s roles. This is followed by Appendices I and II, which contain the models for the primary tools of the certification process: Partnership for Safety Plan (Partnership for Safety Plan) and a Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP). Appendix III – Avionics Certification Process Improvement – supported by appendices IV, V and VI focuses on the unique nature of the avionics approval process and provides information regarding the most effective path for various types of avionics approvals. This appendix is introduced from the guidance developed by the Certification Select Committee to implement the recommendations developed by the Radio Technical Comission for Aeronautics Task Force. The recommendations generally focused around needed improvements in the efficiency and responsiveness of the certification process to facilitate implementation and certification of new avionics technologies. It includes an overview of how the generic certification phases apply to the avionics approval process. Appendix VII contains the Phase Evaluation Checklists used at the end of each Phase of a project to ensure completeness of phase objectives and evaluate the effectiveness of the process. Appendix VIII is the Glossary and Acronyms. This Guide describes how to plan, manage, and document an effective, efficient product certification process and working relationship between the Federal Aviation Administration (Federal Aviation Administration) and an Applicant. The Guide should be used by the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants for Type Certification, Supplemental Type Certification, significant amendments to either Type Certificate or Supplemental Type Certificate, Production Approval, and other design approvals including parts manufacturer approval and Technical Standard Order Authorization. Though focused on large and/or complex programs, it is expected that the CPI principles of up-front planning, project management, and documenting the certification process and working relationship are applicable to all applicants, large or small. The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry are committed to improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the product certification process by establishing up-front a clear understanding of the needs and expectations of both parties in the product certification process. Reducing the cycle time to certify products, while ensuring regulatory compliance, will require earlier involvement of Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants in project planning, open and constructive communication, and safety focused project management. Early involvement helps to identify and resolve the certification basis more efficiently, e.g. means of compliance, special conditions, etc. This process will result in a more effective use of Federal Aviation Administration and Industry resources, particularly through the use of Federal Aviation Administration Designees with oversight focused on critical safety areas. Also, by reducing the time and cost of product certification, safety enhancements through new technology and design innovation can be more rapidly integrated into aviation products. B. RELATION TO Federal Aviation Administration POLICY CPI is not a major overhaul of the current certification process. It does not change what we do; rather it changes how we do it. CPI is a compilation and enhancement of the best business and certification practices and is compatible with Federal Aviation Administration Orders 8110.4, “Type Certification” and 8100.5, “Aircraft Certification Service - Mission, Responsibilities, Relationships, and Programs”. This guide should be used as a supplement to existing Federal Aviation Administration guidance. If you find that this document conflicts with or contradicts any other policy or guidance material, please contact the Aircraft Engineering Division, Aircraft Certification Service-100 for further direction. C. VISION By applying the principles of this Guide, the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants can lay a foundation from which to build mutual trust, leadership, teamwork, and efficient business practices. The processes and products described in this Guide enable the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants to fulfill their respective roles and expedite certification of products while focusing on safety significant issues. It is the mutual goal of the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants to meet or exceed the following vision: Vision of the Product Certification Process A credible and concise product certification process that results in: Timely and efficient product type design and production approvals Clearly defined and understood roles, responsibilities, and accountability of all stakeholders Timely identification and resolution of the certification basis, potential safety issues, and business practice requirements Optimal delegation using safety management concepts with appropriate controls and oversight Note that the word “product” is used throughout this Guide to identify aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, as well as appliances and components or parts thereof. Furthermore, “certification” is used broadly and is not limited to design approvals marked by a certificate. D. ACCOMPLISHING THE VISION The building blocks to bring about the vision of the new certification process are the Partnership for Safety Plan, the Project Specific Certification Plan, and the Phase Evaluation Checklists. The Plans must be agreed to by both the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant prior to conducting a certification project. It is important to adhere to the guidance and intent of these documents to the greatest extent possible, focusing on safety and allowing flexibility in other areas where the Federal Aviation Administration’s and Applicant’s work processes and related customer bases may differ. Material contained in this Guide is a model of how to conduct effective process and project management by applying the Partnership for Safety Plan and Project Specific Certification Plan formats found in Appendices I and II respectively. The Plan formats can be adapted and enhanced within the Federal Aviation Administration's regulatory and policy requirements to meet the needs and work processes of the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants. However, it is essential that Plans address as a minimum all the areas and issues contained in this Guide. This ensures that each certification project is planned and managed in a way that achieves the maximum benefit of this Guide. The Partnership for Safety Plan, shown in Appendix I, is a written “umbrella” agreement between the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant that defines generic procedures to plan for product certification, establish the general expectations or operating norms and identify deliverables. The Partnership for Safety Plan also defines the general discipline and methodology to be used in planning and administering certification projects. Examples of content include generic methodologies for use of Designees, conformity inspections, communication, issue resolution, and generic metrics for measuring project progress. The second Plan is the Project Specific Certification Plan shown in Appendix II. It applies the agreed upon principles of the Partnership for Safety Plan to a specific certification project. Each project will have a Project Specific Certification Plan. The Project Specific Certification Plan is designed to be used as a project management tool, providing milestones, performance measures, and information unique to a certification project. The Project Specific Certification Plan captures procedures based on the generic methodologies of the Partnership for Safety Plan and applies them to a specific project. The Avionics Certification Process Improvement guidance in appendix III captures the means to obtain approval of avionics equipment and systems. The Phase Evaluation Checklists (Appendix VII) are a tool that can be used for project management during each Phase of a certification project. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Managers (PMs) should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the close of each Phase. The PMs are encouraged to include the completion of the Phase Evaluation Checklists as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. To facilitate continuous improvement, any necessary corrective actions should be implemented by the Team, and the Phase Evaluation Checklists should be maintained in the official project file for future national or local program evaluation. When the evaluation identifies the need for corrective actions or improvements it should be included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future reference. CHAPTER 2: PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY PLAN This is a written agreement that states how the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant will conduct product certification, establish the general timelines and expectations, and identify deliverables. The agreement defines the generic discipline and methodology to be used in early exchange of information to plan for successful certification projects. It includes project schedule milestone development, generic delegation procedures, conformity procedures, communications protocol, an issues resolution process, and the generic operating norms for developing metrics for project evaluation. A. TASKS Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant training on certification process Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant meetings on conduct and procedures B. REQUIRED INFORMATION The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification Existing approvals/authorizations Relevant experience FARs, guidance, policy Delegations and procedures Applicant’s procedures C. DELIVERABLES (Deliverables are prerequisites to be completed before beginning Phase I of a project, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant.) Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Signed Partnership for Safety Plan (See Appendix I) D. CRITERIA FOR SUCCESS Provide proper levels of management leadership Commit to securing agreement on all elements of the Partnership for Safety Plan and subsequent PSCPs CHAPTER 3: PHASES OF CERTIFICATION A. OVERVIEW OF CERTIFICATION PHASES There are five Certification Phases that move from early project concept and initiation through post certification activities. The content of the Partnership for Safety Plan and Project Specific Certification Plan outlines the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agreement and operating practices for a Product Certification project. Each Phase is built on early mutual awareness of key certification issues, commitment to planning and managing projects, early identification and resolution of issues and other elements to achieve the aforementioned vision. All phases contribute to improving safety and serve to mitigate cost and project risk. The five Phases are illustrated below: As one works through the five Phases outlined in this Guide, the new process of extensive up-front engagement of both the Federal Aviation Administration and an Applicant becomes evident. The Product Certification Phases shown on the following pages depicts the Key Players in the process, the tasks for each Phase, and the required information, deliverables, and criteria for success. The Key Players’ Roles shown later in this Guide also include the responsibilities, and quality attributes or best practices for teaming, communication, and accountability. B. PHASES OF CERTIFICATION A detailed description of each Phase is contained on the following pages. It includes the Phase’s definition, tasks, required information, deliverables, and criteria for success. Deliverables of each Phase are prerequisites before entering the next Phase. ALL of the Key Players outlined below are involved in ALL of the product certification Phases: Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Management: Makes commitment to the Partnership for Safety Plan and provides leadership and resources. Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Project Managers: Jointly orchestrates the Project Specific Certification Plan and apply the Partnership for Safety Plan agreements. Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Project Officer: Provides timely standardized policy and guidance. Federal Aviation Administration Engineers and Designees: Apply regulations and policy to find compliance including the determination of the adequacy of type design and substantiation data. Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors and Designees: Determine conformity and airworthiness. Federal Aviation Administration Flight Test Pilots and Designees: Conduct Federal Aviation Administration flight tests. Federal Aviation Administration Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor (CSTA): Provides expert advice and technical assistance. Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG): Evaluates conformance to operations and maintenance requirements. A more detailed description of the Key Players’ roles appears in chapter 4 of this Guide. Each Phase of certification described in the following pages identifies certain “Criteria for Success” that are unique to that Phase. The following is a list of Criteria for Success applicable to ALL Phases that must be embedded in both the Federal Aviation Administration’s and Applicant’s culture to assure a successful process: Establish mutual trust Ensure confidentiality Meet all commitments Emphasize empowerment Maintain open and timely communication Provide proper levels of technical project and management leadership with frequent reviews to ensure all are aware of project status, significant issues, and commitments Conduct early familiarization meeting(s) and document accordingly Conduct meeting(s) using well structured agendas/presentations, ensure Key Players attend, and document agreements, issues and actions accordingly Agree to clear time frames, expectations, and action plans to accomplish all Phases Produce timely, high quality documentation of decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, action item assignments, compliance/conformance submittals, and approvals C. PHASE I – CONCEPTUAL DESIGN This Phase is initiated when the Applicant begins design concept for a product that may lead to a viable certification project. The intent is to ensure early, value added, joint involvement with an expectation to surface critical areas and the related regulatory issues, and begin formulating a preliminary Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP). This is an opportunity to apply the Partnership for Safety Plan principles to develop a mutual understanding of potential new projects. 1. Tasks Early Familiarization Meetings on design concepts 2. Required Information New designs, technology, materials, processes, etc. Proposed certification basis and means of compliance Supplier relationships Initial safety assessments 3. Deliverables (Deliverables are prerequisites for subsequent Phases and must be completed before entering the next Phase, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant.) Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Preliminary certification basis considering the intended means of compliance, initial safety assessments, and relevant policy material and begin formulation of a Project Specific Certification Plan Definition and plan for resolution of critical issues, e.g. new designs, technology or processes, potential special conditions, exemptions or equivalent safety findings, co-production or foreign supplier arrangements requiring undue burden assessments; etc. Identify core team for commitment to developing the preliminary Partnership for Safety Plan elements to ensure continuity Phase I Evaluation Checklist (See Appendix VII) 4. Criteria for Success Commitment to the signed Partnership for Safety Plan D. PHASE II – REQUIREMENTS DEFINITION Efforts in this Phase clarify the product definition and the associated risks, and conclude with a mutual commitment to move forward with product certification. Specific regulatory requirements and methods of compliance or critical issues are formulated. A more formal Project Specific Certification Plan is developed.. 1. Tasks Meetings to refine product definition, requirements, and develop the Project Specific Certification Plan Preliminary Certification Board Meeting 2. Required Information Applicant’s descriptive design & production data Critical issues definition Refined safety assessments Proposed schedule 3. Deliverables (Deliverables are prerequisites for subsequent Phases and must be completed before entering the next Phase, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant.) Submission of Application, Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-12 (Federal Aviation Administration Order 8110.4) Acknowledgment of Application Certification Project Notification (Federal Aviation Administration Order 8110.4) and establishment of project Establishment of Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant project certification team Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Preliminary Project Specific Certification Plan including project milestones and related events such as program status reviews (See Appendix II) Agreement of Type Certificate Certification Basis Plan and definition of project issues such as means of compliance including special conditions, equivalent safety findings, exemptions, etc. Phase II Evaluation Checklist (See Appendix VII) 4. Criteria for Success Apply the Partnership for Safety Plan and commit to the early development of the Project Specific Certification Plan E. PHASE III – COMPLIANCE PLANNING During this Phase a Project Specific Certification Plan is completed. The plan is a tool to which the responsible parties commit and use to manage the product certification project. 1. Tasks Project planning and Project Specific Certification Plan development meetings 2. Required Information Initial FMEA/Safety Assessments Stakeholder identification Refined critical issues Production processes 3. Deliverables (Deliverables are prerequisites for subsequent Phases and must be completed before entering the next Phase, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant.) Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Signed Project Specific Certification Plan (See Appendix II) Project schedule with established Federal Aviation Administration/Applicant milestones for completion of analyses, test plan submission, Type Inspection Authorization, conformities, flight test, Aircraft Evaluation Groupevaluations, critical issues resolution plan, and other items affecting the completion of the project Agreed Type Certification Basis Compliance Check List Completion of Stage 1 on all issue papers Identification of stakeholders, including suppliers, installers in the case of engines, propellers, or systems, etc. Delegations defined with oversight criteria Resource requirements Conformity procedures Project evaluation measures Phase III Evaluation Checklist (See Appendix VII) 4. Criteria for Success Apply the Partnership for Safety Plan and commit to agreement on the Project Specific Certification Plan F. PHASE IV – IMPLEMENTATION During this Phase the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration work closely in managing, refining, and achieving their agreed Project Specific Certification Plan to ensure that all agreed upon product specific certification requirements are met. 1. Tasks Demonstration of compliance Compliance and conformance requirements verification Final Certification Board Meeting 2. Required Information Design and production analysis Witnessing Inspection results Safety analysis 3. Deliverables (Deliverables are prerequisites for subsequent Phases and must be completed before entering the next Phase, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant.) Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, and action item assignments Meet milestones for completion of analyses, test plan submission, Type Inspection Authorization, conformities, flight test, Aircraft Evaluation Groupevaluations, critical issues resolution plan, and other items affecting the completion of the project Completed test plans/reports, conformity requests, inspections, and compliance documentation Issue Papers, Special Conditions, Exemptions, Equivalent Safety Findings Compliance and conformance findings Type Design and Production approval issuance Phase Evaluation IV Checklist (See Appendix VII) 4. Criteria for Success Apply Partnership for Safety Plan and manage to the Project Specific Certification Plan Conduct frequent project schedule and compliance checklist status reports, team and management reviews, and make revisions as needed to Project Specific Certification Plan. G. PHASE V – POST CERTIFICATION During this Phase close-out activities provide the foundation for continued airworthiness activities and certificate management for the remainder of the product’s life cycle. 1. Tasks Project follow-up and closure Certificate Management 2. Required Information Airworthiness Limitations Maintenance and Operations requirements Project lessons learned Relevant safety data Type Certificate Data Sheet Evaluation findings Design change data 3. Deliverables Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Compliance Summary Document Type Inspection Report Instructions for Continued Airworthiness Continued Airworthiness Management Plan Phase V Evaluation Checklist (See Appendix VII) 4. Criteria for Success Work together for continuous improvement Apply Partnership for Safety Plan and manage to the Project Specific Certification Plan with a focus on continued operational safety Provide proper levels of technical project and management leadership with frequent reviews to ensure project close-out to schedule and resolution of significant post Type Certificate issues CHAPTER 4: DESCRIPTION OF KEY PLAYERS’ ROLES Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Management Commitment to the Partnership for Safety Plan Provides Leadership and Resources Jointly orchestrate the project and apply the Partnership for Safety Plan agreements Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Project Managers Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Project Officers Provides timely standardized policy and guidance Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Engineers & Designees apply regulations and policy to find compliance including the determination of the adequacy of type design and substantiation data. Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Inspectors & Designees Determines conformity and airworthiness Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Flight Test Pilots & Designees Conducts Federal Aviation Administration flight tests Provides expert advice and technical assistance Federal Aviation Administration Chief Scientific and Technical Advisors (CSTA) Evaluates conformance to operations and maintenance requirements Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation Group NOTE: Appendix III describes Key Players’ roles and responsibilities as they apply to avionics approvals. A. Federal Aviation Administration AND APPLICANT’S MANAGEMENT - PROVIDES LEADERSHIP AND RESOURCES The Applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration work to establish a Partnership for Safety Plan to reach a clear common understanding of their respective responsibilities for the design and production definition and the certification requirements. The respective managements provide leadership and resources to product certification teams through the Project Managers in order to accomplish the project and resolve issues. The management has ultimate responsibility through the product certification team for the quality of compliance finding work, standard application of regulatory compliance policy and procedures, and the timely, efficient completion of the product certification projects. 1. Teamwork Establishes Partnership for Safety Plan early for the involvement and commitment of both parties Ensures the Product Certification Team’s full participation, application of the Partnership for Safety Plan, and adherence to the Project Specific Certification Plan Ensures Product Certification Team engages all stakeholders including other Federal Aviation Administration Engineers, Standards Staffs, Inspectors and Applicants to resolve integration issues, e.g. engine/propeller/APU to airframe compatibility Coaches and mentors Product Certification Team members Models behaviors that promote effective teamwork between the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant 2. Communication Communicates early and often about design, schedules, plans for demonstrating compliance and conformity and anticipated problems Facilitates access to best sources of information Ensures consistency and clarity of positions on issues is communicated to each other Promotes and ensures efficient resolution of issues at the operational level prior to elevating to the higher management levels 3. Accountability Participates in resolving critical issues identified in the Project Specific Certification Plan Moderates appeal process through respective Project Managers Works in partnership to reach early agreement on certification basis Sets realistic schedules and monitors project status Provides leadership and management of resources to support the project Ensures the delivery of a quality product 4. Jointly the Managements Ensure Resources are available to support project: team, travel funds, training, policy and administrative procedures Integration of project requirements with total workload for the respective organizations including: resources, priorities, schedules, staff, and policy considerations Facilitation of issues resolution by providing management oversight and leadership Identification of Project Manager focal points and lines of communication for certification project team Participation in Familiarization Meeting to discuss certification aspects of proposed project concepts B. Federal Aviation Administration AND APPLICANT’S PROJECT MANAGERS – ORCHESTRATES PROJECT AND GETS THE JOB DONE The Federal Aviation Administration, Designees, and Applicant’s Project Managers are the principal focal points for the project. They coordinate and direct the certification team’s effort and ensure things are kept moving to achieve the Product Certification objectives. 1. Teamwork Ensure the right people from the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant are involved Develop and maintain the Project Specific Certification Plan (See Appendix II) Ensure the Product Certification Project Team awareness of design features, proposed means of compliance, new materials, new production processes, co-production or foreign supplier issues, and other critical issues for timely resolution 2. Communication Ensure effective communication flow and quality documentation among specialists, Federal Aviation Administration offices, and Applicant 3. Accountability Ensure commitments and Project Specific Certification Plan schedules are met Develop proposed certification basis and certification Project Specific Certification Plan Manage timely delivery completion of inspections, analysis, test data, exemptions, special conditions, equivalent safety findings, etc. for determining compliance and completing certification of the product Maintain effective oversight and control of the project 4. Jointly the PMs Ensure Notification and involvement of Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant in early project Phases Preparation of all required documentation Completion of accurate data submittals Completion of planning and scheduling Development of the compliance checklist Adherence to agreed project sequence and schedule for test plans, completion of inspections and tests, and data and report submittals to show conformity and compliance Planning for and coordination of all interactions, familiarization, and board meetings during all Phases Determination of project resource requirements to meet Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant commitments Establishment of project team including necessary specialists Preparation of the Project Specific Certification Plan in coordination with all team members (Ref. Order 8100.5 and Appendix II) Identification of new materials, new production processes, and co-production or foreign supplier arrangements requiring an undue burden assessment Development of the product certification basis Accountability as project focal points with their respective Federal Aviation Administration, Designees, and Applicant team members to ensure team is always aware of project status Participation in the development of new project-specific policy safety issues Coordination of technical decisions and regulatory issues with their respective team members Integration of work of project team to promote timely decisions (Ref. Order 8100.5) Identification of unique/novel product features or applications, and potential need for coordination on issue papers, special conditions, exemptions, equivalent safety findings, (Ref. Order 8100.5) Management of the issues resolution process, maintains an issues tracking system, and applies the issues resolution process, as needed Participation in Pre-flight Type Certificate board and presents certification material on project Participation in Final Type Certificate board and presents certification material on project, if applicable Proper evaluation of type design and substantiation data to determine their adequacy Preparation of Type Certificate Data Sheet Preparation of the Phase Evaluation Checklist at the end of each Phase (Ref. Appendix VII) Preparation of Certification Compliance Summary Document (Ref. Order 8110.4 and Appendix II) 5. The Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager Ensures Coordination with Federal Aviation Administration Team members and Designees cooperatively keeping the project team aware of applicable policy and guidance material Preparation of the Certification Project Notification and acknowledgment letter of Applicant’s application (Ref. Orders 8100.5 and 8110.4) Scheduling and chairing of preliminary, interim, flight test and final Type Certificate Board meetings as appropriate Proper preparation, and Designee oversight, where appropriate, are provided for approval of Type Inspection Authorizations and/or Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10 requests for conformity Completion of project file compliance documentation including Applicant’s, Designee’s, and project team member’s required input Proposed certification basis for project and means of compliance are consistent with FAR and policy Findings of compliance are made by appropriate accountable team members Notification of Applicant early of schedule revisions and/or major issues after commencement of certification which would influence prior agreed objectives 6. The Applicant’s Project Manager Ensures Demonstration of compliance to the FAR Application for Type and Production Certification includes available relevant data/information Development of proposed certification basis, means of compliance, and certification Project Specific Certification Plan Submittal of type design data, analyses, plans, and reports, and shows compliance per the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan Notification to Federal Aviation Administration early of schedule revision and/or major design changes after commencement of certification which would influence prior agreed outcomes Submittal of Statement of Conformity (Federal Aviation Administration Form 8130-9) on product and components or parts Notification to Inspector when ground test articles are ready for conformity inspection when required, and for pre-flight test conformity and airworthiness certification Acceptance of Certificates and Approvals from Federal Aviation Administration C. Federal Aviation Administration STANDARDS STAFF PROJECT OFFICER – COORDINATES DIRECTORATE INTERACTION The Standards Staff Project Officer provides the certification team with clear and timely regulatory and policy guidance specific to the project. The Project Officer is the focal point within the accountable project Directorate for that policy and for engaging other appropriate Directorate Staffs on installation issues across FAR Parts e.g., engines, propellers, APUs. 1. Teamwork Works with Directorate policy staff and Product Certification team to provide coordinated policy to the team Assures that the certification basis, including means of compliance, is agreed upon early in project Assures timely support of the project regulatory and policy aspects 2. Communication Serves as advisor to the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Managers and Designees on timely and responsive interpretation of policy and rules Raises critical policy issues early to the Project Managers, e.g., in meetings, telecons, issue papers; and documents agreements and actions to resolve them 3. Accountability Reviews and concurs with the certification basis early Provides guidance on standardized application of rules and policy Assures that last minute changes in policy are applied to Applicant’s products only when critical new safety issues are identified, i.e., the potential for an accident or service difficulty sufficient to warrant Airworthiness Directive action if the product were in service 4. The Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Project Officer Serves as Directorate national focal point and provides Project Managers and Designees with early policy guidance consistent with national policy that is common to all Directorates, e.g., software, high intensity infrared fields Coordinates special conditions, exemptions, and equivalent safety findings within Directorate and with other Directorates, as appropriate Provides pertinent FAR Part regulatory and policy guidance Analyzes the Project Specific Certification Plan to ensure the team has all necessary policies and to identify issues that require additional or future regulations or policies to be undertaken Adheres to all applicable policy and guidance material Attends all relevant meetings and discussions related to the establishing the certification basis and resolving non-standard means of compliance or other critical issues list items Ensures timely processing of all Issue Papers, Special Conditions, Exemptions, etc. related to regulatory and policy issues Ensures timely determination of the certification basis D. Federal Aviation Administration ENGINEERS AND/OR DESIGNEES – APPLY REGULATIONS AND POLICY TO FIND COMPLIANCE The Engineers, as assigned for appropriate disciplines, are the principal contacts for the Applicant. Their activity is always in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager and follows the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan for guiding the certification process, communication guidelines and how rules and policy will be applied. The Engineers and Designees understand the technical details of the project, application of applicable rules and policy, and are responsible for the majority of the compliance findings associated with the project. They also evaluate sufficiency of the type design and substantiation data with the discretion to review any of the data therein, such as critical material process specifications. 1. Teamwork Works closely with team members to meet deadlines, e.g., coordinates early on with Aviation Safety Inspectors, Designees, and the Applicant to request conformity inspections, new material/process specification evaluations, and compliance findings, where needed Participates in all team meetings and discussions appropriate to their areas of responsibility and disciplines 2. Communication Uses timely and effective communication methods to identify and resolve problems early Communicates directly with Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration counterparts on policy staff and other Federal Aviation Administration Engineers and Inspectors to facilitate meeting project objectives Transmits policy and guidance material, with the Standards Staff Project Officer, to Applicant for timely resolution of critical issues Raises critical engineering issues early to the Project Manager, e.g., in meetings, telecons, issue papers; and documents agreements and actions to resolve them Communicates the need for specialized expertise and resources to the team and management 3. Accountability Assures compliance with regulations and policy Responsible for technical details and documentation of findings and issues resolution Maintains appropriate oversight of the Designees Uses all available resources, e.g., peers, Designees, Technical Specialists, CSTAs, policy staff, management, to make quality technical decisions and accomplish project deadlines 4. The Federal Aviation Administration Engineers and/or Designees, as Appropriate Attends all appropriate familiarization, technical, and board meetings Notifies the Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager early of the need for Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor or technical specialist assistance Assists in developing certification basis Reviews and approves certification means of compliance consistent with the agreed certification Project Specific Certification Plan, certification basis and related policy (Federal Aviation Administration only) Oversees the use of engineering delegations and Designees in accordance with the Delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan (Federal Aviation Administration only) Communicates with Applicant and project team on day-to-day technical issues; keeps Project Manager informed Makes compliance findings for design approval Drafts issue papers Ensures the quality and timeliness of approvals and documentation Prepares Type Inspection Authorizations in discipline, requests conformity inspection, when needed, of appropriate test articles, and coordinates with Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors and their Designees Coordinates with Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors and their Designees on the approval of critical parts and new materials or new process specifications Adheres to all applicable policy and guidance material Assures that all data submitted for design and production is complete and accurate to serve as the foundation for issuance of the certificate and subsequent continued airworthiness management activities throughout the life cycle of the aircraft E. Federal Aviation Administration INSPECTORS AND/OR DESIGNEES – DETERMINES CONFORMANCE AND AIRWORTHINESS. The Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors provide consultation and advise on production processes proposed in the design. They conduct and oversee, through Designees, a variety of conformity inspections, evaluations of aircraft airworthiness, and issues airworthiness certificates or other approvals. They conduct progressive evaluation of the manufacturer’s quality and production systems for eventual production approval. The Inspector is alert to conformance issues on critical parts that cannot be determined solely from type design data. This would then require focused process control, inspection, or evaluation within the production quality system. 1. Teamwork Works closely with team members to meet deadlines, e.g., coordinates early on with Federal Aviation Administration Engineers, other Aviation Safety Inspectors, Designees, and the Applicant to conduct conformity inspections, new material/process specification evaluations, and compliance findings, where needed Participates in all team meetings and discussions appropriate to their areas of responsibility and disciplines 2. Communication Uses timely and effective communication methods to identify and resolve problems early Communicates directly with the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration project team members, and other Aviation Safety Inspectors to facilitate meeting project objectives Raises critical production issues early to the Project Manager, e.g., in meetings, telecons, issue papers, and documents agreements and actions to resolve them Communicates the need for specialized expertise and resources to the team and management 3. Accountability Briefs Applicant on conformity inspection, airworthiness approval, and production approval requirements Evaluates conformity, when requested, prior to official Federal Aviation Administration tests Determines airworthiness of aircraft prior to flight test Maintains appropriate oversight of their Designees Assures compliance with regulations and policy governing production approvals Assumes responsibility for production related technical issues resolution and documentation of findings Uses all available resources, e.g., peers, Designees, CSTAs, policy staff, management, to make quality technical decisions and accomplish project deadlines 4. The Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors and/or Designees as Appropriate Attends all appropriate familiarization, technical, and board Meetings Notifies the Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager early of the need for Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor or technical specialist assistance Assists in developing certification basis Reviews and approves production means of compliance consistent with the agreed certification Project Specific Certification Plan, certification basis and related policy (Federal Aviation Administration only) Oversees the use of production delegations and Designees and Applicant in accordance with the Delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan (Federal Aviation Administration only) Coordinates with Applicant and project team on day-to-day issues related to production and conformity aspects; keeps Project Manager informed.” Makes compliance findings for production approval Coordinates with Federal Aviation Administration Engineering or their Designees, as assigned, on requests for conformity inspection and ensures conformity of test articles Coordinates with Federal Aviation Administration Engineering or their Designees, as assigned, on approval of design data affecting critical parts, new material, new process specifications, new technology, and co-production or foreign supplier arrangements that require an undue burden assessment. Adheres to all applicable policy and guidance material Coordinates and prepares appropriate items for Type Inspection Authorization in discipline Assures that all production and inspection data submitted for design and production approval are complete and accurate to serve as the foundation for issuance of the certificate and subsequent continued airworthiness management activities throughout the life cycle of the aircraft Ensures conformity and Airworthiness Certification for release of aircraft for Federal Aviation Administration flight testing in coordination with Federal Aviation Administration flight test pilots and Engineers F. Federal Aviation Administration FLIGHT TEST PILOTS AND/OR DESIGNEES – CONDUCTS PRODUCT CERTIFICATION FLIGHT TESTS The Flight test Pilots provide technical advice to the team on aircraft configuration, operation, flight-testing and instrumentation needed for compliance determinations. They conduct Federal Aviation Administration flight tests and other appropriate evaluations, find compliance to flight test requirements, and provide guidance to the Applicant on preparing the flight manual and related operational procedures. 1. Teamwork Works closely with team members to meet deadlines, e.g., coordinates early with Engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, and Applicant for flight test requirements Participates in all team meetings and discussions appropriate to their areas of responsibility and disciplines 2. Communication Uses informal and formal communication channels to identify and resolve problems early Communicates directly with Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration counterparts on the policy staff and with other Federal Aviation Administration Engineers Raises critical flight test issues early to the Project Manager, e.g. in meetings, telecons, issue papers, and documents agreements and actions to resolve them Communicates the need for specialized expertise 3. Accountability Assures compliance with regulations and policy Assumes responsibility for technical details in their discipline Uses all available resources, e.g. peers, CSTAs, policy staff, management, to make quality technical decisions and accomplish project deadlines 4. The Federal Aviation Administration Pilots and/or Designees as Appropriate Attends all Familiarization and board appropriate Meetings Notifies the Project Manager early on of the need for Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor or technical specialist involvement Assists in developing certification basis Reviews and approves certification means of compliance consistent with the agreed certification Project Specific Certification Plan, certification basis and related policy (Federal Aviation Administration only) Oversees the use of delegations and Designees in accordance with the Delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan (Federal Aviation Administration only) Communicates with Applicant and project team on day-to-day technical issues; keeps Project Manager informed Makes compliance findings Drafts issue papers Prepares relevant items for Type Inspection Authorization in discipline and requests conformity of flight test articles in coordination with Inspector Conducts Federal Aviation Administration Product Certification flight tests Reviews aircraft flight manual and related procedures for approval Adheres to all applicable policy and guidance material Assures that all appropriate flight test data submitted for Type Certificate is complete and accurate to serve as the foundation for issuance of the certificate and subsequent continued airworthiness management activities throughout the life cycle of the aircraft Considers flight test risk management in conjunction with entire team G. Federal Aviation Administration CHIEF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL ADVISOR (CSTA) - PROVIDES EXPERT ADVICE AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE The Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor provides professional technical guidance, advice and assistance in their discipline. They are our direct link to an extensive professional network in the R&D community, professional and academic organizations, industry, other government, and national and international experts in their discipline. 1. Teamwork Works as advisors to certification project teams on issues that require precedent setting means of compliance relating to new or complex technology and technical specialties Participates in Special Certification Reviews, Critical Design Reviews, and Multiple Expert Opinion Teams Assists Federal Aviation Administration team members in identifying areas where their expertise can add value to the quality and timeliness of compliance findings or resolution of complex technical issues 2. Communication Uses informal and formal communication channels to resolve problems identified by the project team early Communicates the need for their specialized expertise Raises issues early, e.g. in meetings, telecons, issue papers, etc. 3. Accountability Provides timely response to project team needs for means of compliance or precedent setting design or production aspects 4. The Federal Aviation Administration Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor Attends appropriate familiarization and board meetings as they and the certification team deem necessary Assists certification team in understanding special technical disciplines and new or complex technology related issues to facilitate timely and adequate compliance findings H. Federal Aviation Administration AIRCRAFT EVALUATION GROUP – EVALUATES CONFORMANCE TO OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS The Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG) provides a link to applicable Flight Standards technical services. This lends an aircraft operational and maintenance perspective to the type design assessment thereby allowing Federal Aviation Administration Engineering and their Designees to determine appropriate compliance requirements in those areas. The Aircraft Evaluation Groupcarries knowledge of the product and how it was type certificated to the aircraft Maintenance Review Board, Flight Operations Evaluation Board, and Flight Standardization Board activities. 1. Teamwork Works closely with team members to meet deadlines, e.g. coordinates early with Engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, and the Applicant on maintenance and operational issues Participates in all team meetings and discussions appropriate to maintenance and operational disciplines 2. Communication Uses informal and formal communication channels to identify and resolve problems early Communicates directly with the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration counterparts in the Directorate Standards Staff, Flight Standards policy staff, and Federal Aviation Administration Engineers Provides Flight Standards Service policy and guidance material to the team Raises critical maintenance or operational issues early to the Project Manager, e.g., in meetings, telecons, issue papers; and documents agreements and actions to resolve them Communicates the need for specialized expertise e.g., Flight Standards Service, Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor 3. Accountability Serves as the focal point for all Flight Standards interests in the certification process Evaluates the product and its systems for operational suitability and maintainability Uses all available resources (e.g., other Flight Standards Service organizations, Federal Aviation Administration Engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors) to make quality, technical decisions and accomplish project deadlines 4. The Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG) Attends all appropriate familiarization, technical, and board Meetings Communicates with Applicant and project team on day-to-day technical issues related to operations and maintenance, and keeps the Project Manager informed Coordinates on Type Inspection Authorizations regarding Aircraft Evaluation Groupissues and coordinates with Federal Aviation Administration Engineers and Aviation Safety Inspectors or their Designees Participates in appropriate flight testing related to Flight Standards operational issues Adheres to all applicable policy and guidance material Assists the certification team in understanding operations and maintenance issues for timely transition into service, and coordinates appropriate issues with key Flight Standards Service policy divisions Transmits pertinent Flight Standards Service policy and guidance to project team Assists Engineers in determining that means of compliance meet operations and maintenance requirements Provides maintenance and operational insight of the type design into Flight Standardization Board, Flight Operations Evaluation Board, Maintenance Review Board processes Reviews and coordinates maintenance and operational aspects of proposed documents for acceptance, i.e., Aircraft Flight Manual, Instructions for Continued Airworthiness, Operating Instructions CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants, in a Partnership for Safety, are dedicated to providing a highly effective and efficient Product Certification Process. Our mutual expectations for the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants’ Partnership for Safety are to plan early, communicate often, and cooperate on initiatives that make aircraft increasingly safer. All Key Players on Product Certification Teams make our commitments happen. Our commitment to Public Safety – Communicate often to: Explain our expectations and listen to concerns Strive for safe solutions to key safety decisions Work as “One Safety Team” Be accountable to: Identify best practices and provide quality service Allocate resources appropriately, including delegations Apply rules and policy properly in a standardized way Keep commitments Come to closure to: Complete projects to the Project Specific Certification Plan and on schedule Work cooperatively and constructively Follow the agreed issues resolution processes APPENDIX I PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY PLAN between the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION And APPLICANT The material contained herein is an airport information desk for constructing a Partnership for Safety Plan (Partnership for Safety Plan). This airport information desk is intentionally not a “boiler plate”, but allows the freedom to innovate and meet the needs of the Applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration. However, it is essential that the Partnership for Safety Plan address the same key content areas of this airport information desk ensuring that as written it captures the meaning and intent of this Guide. TABLE OF CONTENTS PURPOSE EFFECTIVITY PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY 1. GENERAL 2. CORPORATE PLANNING 3. COMMUNICATION AND COORDINATION 4. DELEGATION 5. PRODUCTION QUALITY SYSTEM EVALUATION CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. ISSUES RESOLUTION PROCESS 2. PERFORMANCE MEASURES (a) GENERAL (b) OPERATING NORMS (c) PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLISTS SIGNATORIES PURPOSE The purpose of this Partnership for Safety Plan (Partnership for Safety Plan) is to define a working relationship between the Aircraft Certification Service of the Federal Aviation Administration (Federal Aviation Administration) and Applicant. It provides the foundation from which to build mutual trust, leadership, teamwork, and efficient business practices. This Plan enables the Federal Aviation Administration, Applicant, and their staffs to expedite certification projects by focusing on safety significant issues. It is the mutual goal of the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant to meet or exceed the expectations of this agreement to achieve the following vision: Vision of the Product Certification Process A credible and concise product certification process that results in: Timely and efficient product type design and production approvals Clearly defined and understood roles, responsibilities, and accountability of all stakeholders Timely identification and resolution of the certification basis, potential safety issues, and business practice requirements Optimal delegation using safety management concepts with appropriate controls and oversight In the establishment of this Partnership for Safety Plan, it is understood that a cooperative working relationship is required for this process to be effective. To achieve successfully this Vision, it is understood that the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration team members will work in accordance with the guidelines contained in this Partnership for Safety Plan. EFFECTIVITY This Partnership for Safety Plan becomes effective upon approval by the Federal Aviation Administration Directorate Manager and the Applicant’s President, CEO, or Senior VP officer empowered to commit for the Applicant. It continues in effect until it is superseded, revised or terminated and may be amended by mutual consent of the parties. Any change in the services furnished or other provisions of this Partnership for Safety Plan is formalized by an appropriate written amendment signed by both parties, which outlines the nature of the change. PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY 1. GENERAL This Partnership for Safety Plan is a living document that will be developed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant to the greatest extent possible in advance of any specific certification project. The Partnership for Safety Plan is an important prerequisite to a specific product certification project. It establishes the principles and procedures for early identification of critical issues and early planning so that subsequent to this Partnership for Safety Plan, future projects can be completed in a timely and efficient fashion. The Partnership for Safety Plan will be managed and maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration’s and Applicant’s management focal points in accordance with the “Communications” section below. The Partnership for Safety Plan will include, but not be limited to, consideration of the elements outlined below. The Applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration agree to work to the principles and operational norms outlined in this Partnership for Safety Plan and to future Project Specific Certification Plans (PSCP) that may be developed in conjunction with this agreement. The Project Specific Certification Plan is discussed in Appendix II of the Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. 2. CORPORATE PLANNING The Applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration jointly conduct periodic management program reviews using an agreed process to provide early insight into future potential projects. These reviews also provide a forum to begin early planning for those potential projects as outlined in the early involvement Phases of the Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. The reviews would, to the extent possible, touch broadly on areas that should require special attention, e.g., special conditions, exemptions, equivalent safety findings, unique designs, new materials or processes, production or operational aspects, foreign validation, co-production or use of foreign suppliers, continued airworthiness. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant will participate in early identification of product concepts, applicable standards, and in the product definition and risk management Phases. This will be done as potential certification projects arise to assure agreement and commitment on dealing with critical issues in a value added way. This is an iterative process requiring ongoing mutual evaluation and continuous improvement of the Partnership for Safety Plan and related processes. The Partnership for Safety Plan gives the Federal Aviation Administration a means to keep the Applicant informed of new proposed regulations or policy that could affect future product certification projects. 3. COMMUNICATION AND COORDINATION In the Partnership for Safety Plan, communication and coordination paths should be clearly defined between the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant. Focal points will be identified to avoid conflict and keep both parties informed of all critical communications that affect the needs and responsibilities of their respective roles. This does not preclude any team members from communicating with any other members, but they need to assure the focal points are informed. Thus, critical links should be defined to ensure roles and responsibilities are clear and to facilitate conflict resolution. The focal points will be responsible for the maintenance of the Partnership for Safety Plan. 4. DELEGATION The Federal Aviation Administration depends on using both individual and organizational delegations in the certification process. Delegation will be used to the maximum extent practicable with appropriate oversight safeguards as defined in the Federal Aviation Administration’s delegation management process policies. The Federal Aviation Administration Engineering and Aviation Safety Inspectors’ Designees, Designee oversight controls, related documentation, etc. should be identified and agreed early, preferably prior to a specific project. This should also include by reference, reliance on existing agreements or working procedures generated between the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant, where appropriate. The Partnership for Safety Plan should be specific as to what aspects of the Federal Aviation Administration project responsibilities are delegated, and should address the delegation and oversight process as well as Designees disciplines and limitations. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree to manage all Designee activity within the regulations and policy regarding Designee appointment, procedures, and oversight. It is essential that the Federal Aviation Administration and the public have confidence in the integrity of the Designee system and that it functions properly. Both the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree to foster an environment where open communication between the Designees and Applicant’s management, and between the Designees and their Federal Aviation Administration counterparts is standard practice. That environment should encourage the Designees, within the scope of their delegation, to openly communicate certification items with Federal Aviation Administration that is necessary to maintain confidence in the Designee system. The Applicant agrees to create a working environment where Designees can make compliance and conformity findings free from undue pressure and with the support and knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration. It should be clearly understood by Federal Aviation Administration personnel and Designees that their objective is to find compliance with the regulations and not to dictate design. Because of the close integration of the design, production, and continued airworthiness processes, it is necessary to have all stakeholders in the delegation process agree on the extent of delegation, the procedures, and the degree of delegation oversight to be used in each project. The Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration Engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, Flight Test Pilots, and Federal Aviation Administration Designees will agree upon and document a plan by which the Designees in different disciplines can work together directly to the greatest extent possible to ensure compliance to the FAR while providing more timely project management. The Partnership for Safety Plan should also describe the respective Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant roles in the conformity inspection process. As noted in applicable Federal Aviation Administration Orders and policy, the goal of the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant is to develop a system that ensures conforming products and that the Federal Aviation Administration can rely upon to the greatest extent possible using the Designees with appropriate oversight to expedite the work. This should include in coordination with the Delegation section of the Partnership for Safety Plan, criteria for determining which conformities will be conducted, which are delegated to both Engineering and Aviation Safety Inspectors’ Designees, and how deviations will be dispositioned. The system should include, but is not limited to: Maintaining the custody chain of conformed articles destined for an official Federal Aviation Administration test. Notifying Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspector of any changes to ground/flight test articles after conformity inspection has been completed. Ensuring requests are not duplicated and the timely and efficient conduct of conformities and dispositioning of deviations occurs. Identifying who issues the requests, conducts the inspections, and dispositions the deviations. Providing for the completion of inspection, documentation, and dispositioning of deviations or changes before tests are conducted. 5. PRODUCTION QUALITY SYSTEM EVALUATION In addition, the Partnership for Safety Plan should describe the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s roles in the production approval process. The goal of Federal Aviation Administration production approval is to verify that the Applicant has established a system which ensures that only products and parts conforming to the Federal Aviation Administration approved design are released to service. Evaluations to determine adequacy of this system should be conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration during the type certification Phase of the project, where practicable. The Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors’ Designees, with appropriate oversight, could be used to facilitate the work. CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. ISSUES RESOLUTION PROCESS The objective of this process is to identify and resolve issues and disagreements as early as possible at the team working level facilitated by the Applicant’s and the Federal Aviation Administration’s Project Managers (PMs). The Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will jointly maintain a project issues tracking list. They will continually manage those issues to assure adequate progress is being made on the resolution of issues so as to ensure compliance with the FAR while not adversely affecting project schedules. The PMs will periodically keep their managements and other certification team members apprised of the progress on resolving issues. If there is agreement on the progress of issues resolution, the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will document the actions, decisions, and outcomes in the project records. Any necessary changes to the project schedule or the issues will be coordinated and agreed upon by all affected team members. Should any problems arise with open issues where their resolution is not proceeding according to the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan, the PMs will utilize the following issues resolution process: (a.) If there is disagreement, the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs, their respective managers, and other appropriate team members in the affected disciplines will review the issue and recommend a solution. If they agree, the resolution will be documented and all team members will be informed. (b.) If the managers and appropriate team members are unable to agree, the office raising the concerns will prepare a white paper detailing the issue, respective parties’ positions, and options for resolution. Timelines will be established for resolution of each issue to permit tracking via the project issues list and ensure timely resolution. Where appropriate, the Federal Aviation Administration Issue Paper process should be used, but should not be applied just for the sake of tracking which can be done through the project issues tracking list maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant PMs. (c.) The issue will then be submitted to the applicable Directorate Manager(s), the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Manager’s management, and, where appropriate, Federal Aviation Administration regional counsel and other appropriate Federal Aviation Administration Division(s) for review and disposition. (d.) The conclusions, recommendations, and outcome of the issue resolution will be documented by the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs in the project records. 2. PERFORMANCE MEASURES (a) GENERAL Project tracking and documentation provide for early identification and resolution of potential conflicts. Early communication between the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration in the conceptual/prototype stages of product development is critical to assure availability of resources, adequate planning, and flexibility for both the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant. Effective project management oversight, planning, communication, and documentation are needed. This process is very management and discipline dependent. Priority must be placed on early identification and resolution of the following: Establishment of certification basis and means of compliance Project planning and management including, for type design and production issues. Identification and tracking of significant issues, issues papers, exemptions, special conditions, equivalent safety finding proposals, Airworthiness Limitations, and applicable in-service maintenance/operational history Definition of clear, up-front, pass/fail criteria, wherever possible Validation and documentation of critical assumptions, installation interface issues, and data for Airworthiness Limitations Conformity requirements involving e.g., major critical production processes, new materials, new technologies, Delegation (what, why, oversight criteria) Co-production issues, foreign supplier arrangements requiring undue burden assessment, other authorities’ involvement, validation needs, etc. Resource needs/constraints of all stakeholders accommodated to the greatest extent possible The above guidelines should focus on producing quality deliverables that show an efficient and credible certification process. These and other project deliverables can be associated with the Phases in the certification process as delineated in the Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. The operating norms agreed upon between the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant will establish the basis for operating under this Partnership for Safety Plan and subsequent PSCPs. (b) OPERATING NORMS Each Federal Aviation Administration Directorate will establish with the Applicant, agreed, documented, operating norms. These norms will guide the timeliness and quality of deliverables and services provided by both the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant during the project. Operating norms should be defined to meet the needs of the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration consistent with agreed PSCPs. Many factors affect the planning and management of certification projects, such as, project size and complexity, and degree of delegation. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicants recognize, for example, that an Supplemental Type Certification or engine project may have significantly different resource needs and timing than a rotorcraft or large transport airplane project. The Partnership for Safety Plan and each Project Specific Certification Plan should identify appropriate agreed operating norms since there could be different team members on different PSCPs. An agreed Partnership for Safety Plan and early pre-project communication and planning in accordance with that Partnership for Safety Plan are essential prerequisites to preparing for successful certification projects. The objective of any successful project is to meet or beat the plan. Unless compelling reasons are presented to deviate from this Guide, the operating norms for certain key deliverables should be set as low as possible within the following typical ranges: Product Certification Process Norms Within 2 weeks after application: Acknowledgment of application issued Federal Aviation Administration Certification Project Notification (CPN) issued Within 1 month after application: Project team identified (Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant) Preliminary Type Certification Board Meeting (PTCBM) scheduled Within 1 to 3 months after PTCBM: Proposed Certification Basis G-1 issue paper prepared and processing begins (stage 1) Project Specific Certification Plan drafted Within 4 to 6 months after PTCBM: Final Certification Basis G-1 issue paper closed. Project Specific Certification Plan agreed and signed, including the mutually agreed project schedule. Within 6 to 9 months after PTCBM: All issue papers closed One month prior to scheduled Type Certificate/Supplemental Type Certification/Production Approval issuance: Compliance documentation submittals should be scheduled over the course of a project to be completed by this point in time. More than one month may be needed in some cases, especially when submittals are not Federal Aviation Administration Designee approved or recommended for approval. Additional norms may be necessary or appropriate depending upon the specific project needs. When developing a Project Specific Certification Plan, the need to define norms should be assessed for all issues identified such as those considerations in Paragraph 2.(a.) above or other deliverables. Any major issues, design changes, or compliance requirements should result in agreed revisions to the Project Specific Certification Plan with appropriate milestones for closure. As the project progresses other major issues may be identified. Where appropriate, issue papers and a revised Project Specific Certification Plan will be prepared within 1 month after identification of the issue along with a plan to achieve its resolution. In such cases, the Federal Aviation Administration will work within boundaries of their policies and public rulemaking procedures. The Partnership for Safety Plan compels the partners to work together to understand the product architecture early enough to preclude last-minute guidance (verbal or written) new interpretations or rule escalation that would adversely affect the mutually agreed upon program goals. (c) PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLISTS The Phase Evaluation Checklists (Appendix VII of the Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification) are tools that can be used for project management during the appropriate Phases. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Managers (PMs) should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the close of each phase of a project. The PMs are encouraged to include the completion of the Phase Evaluation Checklist as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. To facilitate continuous improvement any necessary corrective actions should be implemented by the Team and the Phase Evaluation Checklists should be maintained in the official project file for future national or local program evaluation. When the evaluation identifies the need for corrective actions or improvements it should be included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future reference. SIGNATORIES The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree to the provisions of this Partnership for Safety Plan as indicated by the signature of their duly authorized representatives. Agreed by: (This is a representative sample of possible signatories and could include others deemed appropriate to provide necessary commitments and accountability. Include Names and date) Applicant President, CEO, or Senior VP Applicant Certification Manager Applicant VP Quality Assurance Federal Aviation Administration Directorate Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration MIO/manufacturing Inspection District Office Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation GroupManager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Manager(s) APPENDIX II PROJECT SPECIFIC CERTIFICATION PLAN between the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION And APPLICANT for Product Certification The material contained herein is an airport information desk for preparing the Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP). This airport information desk is intentionally not a “boiler plate”, but allows the freedom to innovate and meet the special project needs of the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration. However, it is essential that the Project Specific Certification Plan addresses the same key content areas of this airport information desk ensuring that as written it captures the meaning and intent of this Guide. The Project Specific Certification Plan should include elements that were not addressed in detail in the Partnership for Safety Plan and it should incorporate by reference appropriate procedures, agreements, or other elements pertinent to the project. TABLE OF CONTENTS PURPOSE EFFECTIVITY PRODUCT CERTIFICATION 1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 2. PROJECT SCHEDULE 3. CERTIFICATION BASIS 4. MEANS OF COMPLIANCE 5. COMMUNICATION AND COORDINATION 6. DELEGATION 7. TESTING PLAN (a.) GENERAL (b.) FLIGHT TEST (c.) CONFORMITY 8. COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTATION PRODUCTION CERTIFICATION POST CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 1. COMPLIANCE SUMMARY DOCUMENT 2. INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS (ICA) 3. CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS MANAGEMENT PROJECT ISSUES PLANNING CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. GENERAL 2. PERFORMANCE MEASURES (a.) GENERAL (b.) OPERATING NORMS (c.) PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLISTS SIGNATORIES PURPOSE The purpose of this Project Specific Certification Plan is to define and document a product certification plan between the Aircraft Certification Service of the Federal Aviation Administration (Federal Aviation Administration) and Applicant to expedite certification of the product under standardized procedures. The Project Specific Certification Plan will provide the foundation from which to build mutual trust, teamwork, and efficient business practices between the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant during certification of the product. It is the mutual goal of all team members to meet or exceed the expectations of this agreement. It is understood that this Project Specific Certification Plan will be executed in accordance with the Partnership for Safety Plan. In the establishment of this Project Specific Certification Plan, it is understood that a cooperative working relationship is required for these procedures to be effective. To implement successfully the Project Specific Certification Plan procedures, it is understood that both the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration team members work in accordance with the established guidelines. The Federal Aviation Administration team members will recognize and utilize the knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration Designees to the greatest extent possible and keep the Applicant’s team members abreast of certification issues that may arise. The Project Specific Certification Plan schedule will be within specified ranges agreed to in the norms of the Partnership for Safety Plan and additional milestones will be considered by the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant as firm commitments unless a change is agreed to. It is intended that all team members facilitate review and approval of the necessary design and production data and related compliance documents in a timely manner with the objective of bettering the Project Specific Certification Plan wherever possible. The Project Specific Certification Plan is a living document. This means that if both the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree that modification to the Plan is needed, an amended Plan is drafted. The Plan will be developed to the greatest extent possible as soon as the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant agree that the certification project is a viable one for which resources can be planned and committed for its completion. As the project progresses, the Project Specific Certification Plan will be managed and maintained jointly by the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Project Managers. EFFECTIVITY This Project Specific Certification Plan shall become effective upon approval by the Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Office Manager and the Applicant’s Certification or Airworthiness Manager. It will continue in effect throughout all Phases of the product certification unless it is superseded, revised, or terminated. This Project Specific Certification Plan may be amended by mutual agreement or terminated by either party. Any change in the services furnished or other provisions of this Project Specific Certification Plan will be formalized by an appropriate written amendment signed by both parties, which will outline the nature of the change. PRODUCT CERTIFICATION 1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION This section should contain a brief description of the project. 2. PROJECT SCHEDULE Provide a detailed project schedule to identify all major milestones, including appropriate project management reviews and any required scheduled deliverables such as those listed below. These milestones need to be established in accordance with the operating norms identified in the Partnership for Safety Plan. Every effort must be made to establish realistic schedules considering both the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s total workloads and other resource commitments. Design, production, operational, and maintenance aspects as well as foreign authority validation requirements should be planned for and considered. All issue papers should also be included with a resolution plan and prioritization of the issues to be resolved. The schedule should also adhere to the Phases and process flow identified in The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. This would include identifying in the schedule all appropriate deliverables for the project such as, but not limited to, those shown below: Deliverables: Familiarization and board meeting(s) minutes Draft and final Project Specific Certification Plan Product Certification team and management status reviews Application for Type/Production Certification Letter of application acknowledgment Certification Project Notification Type Certification basis (documented in G-1 issue paper) Issue papers, special conditions, exemptions, equivalent safety findings, undue burden assessments, etc. (including resolution plan and schedule) Issues tracking list Compliance check list Conformity procedures Type Inspection Authorizations and Conformity requests Delegation plan Compliance data submittals (e.g., test plans/reports, analyses.) Type Inspection Report (TIR) Installation and Operating instructions Flight Manual Structural Repair Manual Instructions for Continued Airworthiness Continued Airworthiness management plan Type Design approvals (Type Certificate/Supplemental Type Certification and amendments) Type Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS) Production approvals/certification Production Limitation Record (PLR) Airworthiness Certifications Compliance Summary Document Phase Evaluation Checklists 3. CERTIFICATION BASIS The Certification Basis identifies the applicable standards to which the Applicant must show compliance. It also includes the need for special conditions, exemptions, and equivalent safety findings, if any. An issues list should be included to highlight those special requirements needing resolution and other areas which may be significant, even though they may not warrant a special condition, exemption, or equivalent safety finding. 4. MEANS OF COMPLIANCE This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan will summarize the applicable FAR paragraph by paragraph with the agreed means of compliance that will be met for type certification. The Project Specific Certification Plan will be comprehensive and identify all compliance requirements. The Project Specific Certification Plan will identify which compliance items are delegated or not and why, when test plans, conformity inspections, test or analytic reports are to be submitted and approved, and who has primary responsibility for the deliverables to both the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant. 5. COMMUNICATION AND COORDINATION This section describes the communication and coordination paths between the Federal Aviation Administration, the Applicant, and, where appropriate, co-producers, suppliers, other Civil Aviation Authorities, etc. Focal points and their roles should be clearly identified and kept to a minimum to avoid conflict. The Applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration PMs must be kept informed of all critical communications. This does not preclude any team member from communicating with any other member, but they need to assure the PMs are informed. Thus, critical links should be defined to ensure roles and responsibilities are clear to define accountable team members responsible for deliverables and to facilitate conflict resolution. Team members should include, but are not limited to the following: Applicant’s Project Manager Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager Applicant’s Project Quality Manager Federal Aviation Administration Engineers and Designees Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors and Designees Federal Aviation Administration Flight Test Pilots and Designees Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Project Officer Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards Aircraft Evaluation Group Federal Aviation Administration Chief Scientific and Technical Advisors (CSTA) (as required) Other authorities (for overseas assistance on witnessing or conformities or when type certificate validation is anticipated) Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant’s Legal (consultation as required) 6. DELEGATION The oversight and documentation requirements of Engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, and Flight Test Pilot Designees should be identified and agreed to in this section. This should also include reliance on existing delegation authorization agreements or working procedures generated between the Federal Aviation Administration, Applicant, and other Authorities, as appropriate, that should already be specified in the Partnership for Safety Plan. As outlined in Appendix VIII, Delegation Planning, the Project Specific Certification Plan should be specific as to what aspects of the project are delegated and what if any stipulations, coordination, or limitations are placed upon that delegation. Delegation should be applied to the maximum extent practicable with appropriate safeguards and oversight as defined in the Federal Aviation Administration's delegation management process policy and this Project Specific Certification Plan. Because of the close integration of the design, production, and continued airworthiness processes, it is necessary to have all stakeholders agree on the procedures and degree of delegation and oversight to be used in the project. To facilitate certification, the Federal Aviation Administration Designee system will be utilized to the greatest extent possible. Both the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree to foster an environment where open communication between the Designees and company management, and between the Designees and their Federal Aviation Administration counterparts is standard practice. The Applicant agrees to create a working environment where Designees can make compliance and conformity findings free from undue pressure and with the support and knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration. It is understood by Federal Aviation Administration personnel and Designees that their objective is to find compliance and conformity with the regulations and not to dictate design. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree to manage all Designee activity within the regulations and policy regarding Designee appointment, procedures, and oversight. 7. TESTING PLAN (a.) GENERAL This section should contain the requirements for the planning, preparation, and conduct of Federal Aviation Administration required testing. The Applicant’s product development tests do not require Federal Aviation Administration involvement. However, Federal Aviation Administration certification credit will not be granted for development tests unless arrangements are made and agreed upon prior to testing. These pretest arrangements must be coordinated with appropriate Federal Aviation Administration Engineering, Flight Test Pilots, and Aviation Safety Inspectors with sufficient lead-time to ensure all aspects necessary for the desired Federal Aviation Administration credit toward certification are achieved. This is particularly important for critical parts and components or when new technology, new materials or new processes are involved which should necessitate a greater depth of review and conformity inspection. Federal Aviation Administration personnel will witness all ground and flight tests intended for certification credit that are not specifically delegated to Designees prior to testing. Delegation should be used wherever possible. Who will witness which tests should be planned for and documented in advance in the Delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan and the compliance checklist. When the Federal Aviation Administration will witness tests, they will meet the project schedule as agreed to the greatest extent possible. The Applicant should keep the Federal Aviation Administration informed of test schedules and changes should be negotiated with affected team members. The following items are required prior to testing: Drawings and specifications sufficiently describing the design and production of the test article; Federal Aviation Administration approved test plan, including a description and/or drawing of the test set-up, instrumentation, calibration requirements, etc.; The Applicant’s completed inspections and Statement of Conformity, Federal Aviation Administration Form 8130-9; Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10, Conformity Request; Federal Aviation Administration Form 8100-1, Conformity Report, indicating the results of the Conformity Inspection including disposition of deviations by Federal Aviation Administration Engineering or their Designee if so delegated. (A copy must be available for the official test witnessing.) When specifically delegated as identified in the Delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan, Designees can submit fully approved test plans with Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 and Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10 requests for conformity inspection, where needed, and disposition conformity deviations. All instrumentation that is required for an Federal Aviation Administration certification test will require calibration criteria to be agreed with the accountable Federal Aviation Administration Engineering team members or their Designee, if so delegated, and to be documented in each test plan or in generic calibration procedures documents as appropriate. (b.) FLIGHT TEST This section should contain any unique requirements for the planning, preparation, and conduct of Federal Aviation Administration required flight testing. Flight tests are conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Type Inspection Authorization. The Type Inspection Authorization also authorizes conformity and airworthiness inspections and flight tests to determine compliance to the certification requirements. It is important to ensure close pre-flight test coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, including Federal Aviation Administration discipline managers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, and the flight test pilots in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration policy. The Project Specific Certification Plan will provide the clarity to ensure: Conducting of conformity inspections early in the project. Timely, high-quality documentation. Pertinent Applicant flight tests are completed and results reported prior to Federal Aviation Administration flight test. Coordination within Federal Aviation Administration for concurrent Product Certification and Aircraft Evaluation Groupflight testing. Aircraft conformity, airworthiness certification, and identification of operating limitations. Detailed scheduling and the use of delegation will be specified. Consideration of flight test risk management in conjunction with entire team (c.) CONFORMITY Federal Aviation Regulations 21.33 and 21.53 require the Applicant to make all inspections necessary to establish the conformity of the product being presented to the Administrator for certification and to submit a Statement of Conformity to the Federal Aviation Administration on Federal Aviation Administration Form 8130-9. The Federal Aviation Administration will then determine as far in advance as possible, which Statements of Conformity it will accept without verification and which will require Federal Aviation Administration conformity inspections. Some factors affecting this would be the criticality of the part/component, whether there is new material, new process, or technology involved, and/or whether there is an existing quality control or inspection system that has demonstrated its ability to adequately assure conformity. This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should describe what conformities will be needed, and the Federal Aviation Administration’s and Applicant’s roles in the conformity inspection process for the project. This should be consistent with the Delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan. It should state, which conformity inspections will be conducted, which are delegated to Designees, and how deviations will be dispositioned. A system should be established to: Maintain custody of conformed articles destined for an official Federal Aviation Administration test. Notify Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspector of any changes to ground/flight test articles after conformity inspection has been completed. Ensure requests are not duplicated and the timely and efficient conduct of conformities and dispositioning of deviations occur. Identify who issues the requests, conducts the inspections, and dispositions the deviations. Provide for the completion of inspection, documentation, and dispositioning of deviations or changes before tests are conducted. Provide for timely conduct of conformity inspection at non-US suppliers. Conformity inspections will be performed by Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors or their Designees. These inspections will be performed in response to Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10 (request for conformity) issued by the Federal Aviation Administration or their Designees. The Applicant, Federal Aviation Administration Engineer and Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspector, along with their respective Designees will agree upon and document a plan by which the Designees from all disciplines can work directly together to perform conformity. 8. COMPLIANCE DOCUMENTATION This section should describe the procedures for submittal and processing of compliance documentation. The Project Specific Certification Plan should identify what data will be submitted and by whom. It should account for all data (not just drawings) pertinent to defining the type design, including manufacturing specifications, and to conducting the showings of compliance required for Federal Aviation Administration certification. This would include, but is not limited to, test plans, test reports, test setup schematics, test instrumentation, drawings, analyses (e.g., stress, safety, damage tolerance), material or process specifications, manuals. The Applicant will submit one copy of the data with each Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3. Data submitted without an Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 will require Federal Aviation Administration Engineering review and approval which may add to the processing time. This should be taken into account when developing the project schedule. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant will agree and document the amount of time needed for review, disposition, and approval or acceptance of the data, as appropriate. Typically this may be up to four (4) weeks for Designee recommended approval data. Some submittals due to size or complexity may require more time such as Instructions for Continued Airworthiness and safety analyses. The timing and process for such submittals should be agreed between the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant and documented in the Project Specific Certification Plan. Data submittals that are Designee approved are reviewed only for Designee oversight purposes, whereas data that is recommended for approval must be reviewed for those aspects that the Designee could not or did not evaluate. Hence, communication and pre-planning for data submittal and consideration of the level of delegation between Designees and Federal Aviation Administration is essential, and encouraged to ensure timely and efficient data approval. PRODUCTION CERTIFICATION This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should outline production quality project issues and how they will be managed to permit early approval of the production system. The goal is to have concurrent design and production approval issuance. The primary focal points for the production approval process are the Federal Aviation Administration Principal Aviation Safety Inspector and the Applicant’s Project Quality Manager. Production approval is granted after the Applicant has demonstrated, and the Federal Aviation Administration has verified, that the Applicant has developed and is capable of maintaining a quality assurance system. This system will assure that only products and parts conforming to the design data are released for commercial service use. For existing Production Approval Holders (PAH) who will be adding a new product to an existing approved production system, issues to be considered should include: Approval of new materials, new processes, new suppliers, co-production agreements, new technologies or new applications of existing technology, etc. Federal Aviation Administration undue burden assessment of non-US suppliers and/or co-producers Instructions for assembly and test of the final product to assure conformance Coordination with Engineering on production Material Review Board requirements and integrating engineering and production Certificate Management activities Controls to be placed on production as a result of design Airworthiness Limitations or the criticality of parts and components Configuration control requirements Any other reviews necessary to assure that a conforming product will be produced under the Federal Aviation Administration approved quality inspection system In addition, for Applicants who do not hold an existing production approval for the type of product which is being certificated under this Project Specific Certification Plan, the Applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Federal Aviation Administration, the existence of and compliance to a quality system which satisfies ALL the requirements of the applicable subparts of FAR Part 21. POST CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 1. COMPLIANCE SUMMARY DOCUMENT The Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will prepare a summary at the end of each certification project to capture and retain the corporate knowledge learned during the project. The summary should capture only unique data, precedent issues (e.g., regulatory, policy, or technical), and both the Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration perspectives, feedback, and lessons learned. This document is not to be a complete history of the project, but should only document those areas out of the ordinary that require process improvements, affect rule/policy making, etc. in order to provide continuous improvement of the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant's working relationship. This summary plus the phase evaluation checklists should be evaluated by the team and appropriate changes to the Partnership for Safety Plan or future PSCPs should be made. When the team identifies where changes to the Guide would be beneficial those should be referred to Aircraft Certification Service-100 for consideration. 2. INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS (ICA) Except for the Airworthiness Limitations, the Instructions for Continued Airworthiness may be incomplete at the time of Type Certification. However, a program must be in place to insure they are complete prior to issuance of the standard airworthiness certificate or delivery of the first aircraft. 3. CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS MANAGEMENT The details of how the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant will handle continued airworthiness issues, after delivery of the first aircraft or issuance of the standard airworthiness certificate, will be agreed and documented. This will be consistent with the FAR and Federal Aviation Administration policy on certificate management, reporting, self-disclosure and the requirements for implementing corrective actions in both the type design and production systems. PROJECT ISSUE PLANNING The Applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will jointly maintain a project issues tracking list. This list, at a minimum, should include issues identified as potential “show-stoppers.” The list will identify the issue, the plan and milestones for their resolution, as well as the primary responsible team member for assuring the closure of each issue within the operating norms of the project schedule. The PMs will continually manage those issues to assure adequate progress is being made on their resolution so as to not adversely affect the project schedule. The PMs will identify to their management and other appropriate team members, concerns and problems with open issues and seek early resolution of any items not proceeding according to the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan. A specific issue resolution process example is shown in the Partnership for Safety Plan. (Appendix I of The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification) The process as defined in a Partnership for Safety Plan may be incorporated by reference in the Project Specific Certification Plan or a specific process could be included here to meet any unique needs of the particular project. CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. GENERAL Continuous improvement applies to all elements of the Partnership for Safety Plan, the Project Specific Certification Plan, and all Phases of projects. This can be accomplished by applying the “Criteria for Success” that are defined in the Guide. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant's Team must provide proper levels of technical project and management leadership with frequent reviews to ensure all are aware of project status, significant issues, and that commitments are met. The Team should always document clear time frames, expectations, agreements, schedules, milestones, action item assignments, compliance/conformance submittals and approvals deadlines, and decisions. This will help foster an environment of mutual trust, confidentiality, and empowerment. 2. PERFORMANCE MEASURES (a.) GENERAL The performance measures for the project will be provided in this section. It defines the agreed norms, and how they will be accomplished in accordance with the Partnership for Safety Plan elements in the Performance Measurement section. Other factors could also be considered for performance measures in addition to deliverables listed in the PROJECT SCHEDULE section above. These could include, where appropriate, interpersonal relationship measures and leadership principles. (b.) OPERATING NORMS Each Federal Aviation Administration Directorate will establish with the Applicant, agreed, documented, operating norms consistent with the Partnership for Safety Plan. Those norms will guide the timeliness and quality of products and services delivered by both the Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant during the conduct of the project. Examples of metrics for measuring performance could include parameters such as meeting schedule milestones, quality of submittals, issues resolved, task re-accomplishment and performance against other operating norms. (c.) PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLISTS The Phase Evaluation Checklists (Appendix VII of this Guide) are tools used for project management during the appropriate Phases. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Managers (PMs) should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the close of appropriate Phases of a project. These forms should be continuously evaluated by the Applicant/Federal Aviation Administration team for immediate process improvement. The PMs are encouraged to include the completion of the Phase Evaluation Checklists as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. During initial implementation, a Federal Aviation Administration/Aerospace Industry Association/GAMA Product Certification Continuous Improvement Steering Committee will review all project evaluation feedback on current projects and recommend Guide changes for continuous improvement. To facilitate continuous improvement any necessary corrective actions should be implemented by the Team and the Phase Evaluation Checklists should be maintained in the official project file for future national or local program evaluation. When the evaluation identifies the need for corrective actions or improvements it should be included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future reference. SIGNATORIES The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant agree to the provisions of this Project Specific Certification Plan as indicated by the signature of their duly authorized representatives. Agreed by: (This is a representative sample of possible signatories and could include others deemed appropriate to provide necessary commitments and accountability. Include Names and date) Applicant Certification Manager Applicant Project Manager Applicant Project Quality Manager Federal Aviation Administration AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE Manager Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager Federal Aviation Administration manufacturing Inspection District Office Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Designee(s) Federal Aviation Administration Principal Inspector Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Manager Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation GroupInspector(s) APPENDIX III AVIONICS CERTIFICATION PROCESS IMPROVEMENT The material contained herein is an airport information desk for applying the certification phases and concepts discussed in The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification to the avionics approval process. The basic structure and premise of the processes described may be applied to avionics and non-avionics appliances. This material should be used by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicants of avionics equipment to obtain design, production, and installation approvals. Scope The avionics Certification Process Improvement (CPI) focuses on special issues typically faced by applicants and the Federal Aviation Administration during the avionics approval process and provides information regarding the most efficient path for various types of avionics approvals. The approval process may include either Technical Standard Order (TSO) approval or installation approval via Type Certificate (TC) or Supplemental Type Certificate (STC), or both. The process varies depending on the applicability of Technical Standard Order standards and issues that arise regarding the installation of the equipment. The basic structure and premise of the processes described may be applied to non-avionics appliances as well. It should be noted, however, that depending on the type of product, the applicability will vary. The application of this material to appliances other than avionics should be coordinated with the Federal Aviation Administration. For the purposes of this document, it should be noted the term Approval includes certifications, authorizations, and other forms of approval. Purpose This document complements The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification, which contains a description of the purpose and vision of the improved certification process. It is expected that the CPI principles of up-front planning, project management, and documenting the certification process and working relationship are applicable to all applicants. This extends from large Type and Production Certificate applicants to those applying for avionics approval through the Technical Standard Order approval process. When the Federal Aviation Administration and avionics applicants engage in the CPI process The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification, intended to be the overarching guide to using CPI, should be used in conjunction with this document. General The below listed items are issues that should be addressed when developing a new avionics product. This will provide the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant a clear understanding of the best processes to use in the certification of these systems. • Project Operational Concept (including background, operational purpose, justification, project maturity and user interest) • Project benefits, e.g. safety enhancements and efficiency • Anticipated constraints of the project and equipment • Project specific Operation Procedures (including new phraseology, task analysis, contingency and emergency procedures) • Human factors issues (including display requirements, crew training, additional workload demands, and crew resource management) • Equipment compatibility issues • Technical requirements (including Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS), bench and flight tests, and Instructions for Continued Airworthiness) • Operational safety assessment (including a proposed target level of safety and failure mode analysis) • Operational test and evaluation plan • Potential Flight Standards approval issues, i.e. Operations, Maintenance, Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG), etc. • Need for Flight Procedures coordination, i.e. special approaches • Certification basis and means of compliance • Project planning and management (including type design and production issues) • Significant issues, issues papers, exemptions, special conditions, equivalent safety finding proposals, Airworthiness Limitations, and applicable in-service maintenance/operational history • Clear, up-front, pass/fail criteria, wherever possible • Critical assumptions, installation interface issues, and data for Airworthiness Limitations • Conformity requirements involving major critical production processes, new materials, new technologies, delegation (what, why, oversight criteria) • Co-production issues, foreign supplier arrangements requiring undue burden assessment, other authorities’ involvement, validation needs, etc. • Resource needs/constraints of all stakeholders accommodated to the greatest extent possible • Equipment and installation approval processes for other countries that require Federal Aviation Administration resources • Identification of the equipment manufacturer and the certification applicant’s roles, responsibilities, and communication channels with the Federal Aviation Administration when the manufacturer and the applicant are not the same Expanded Use of Approved Model List For avionics equipment that may be installed similarly on several different aircraft models, one certification approach to consider for certain applications is the generic Supplemental Type Certification approval process. The goal of the generic Supplemental Type Certification approval process is to develop installation instructions that can be used to install avionics equipment in several different aircraft models. This concept reduces the number of follow-on approvals that must be obtained by the avionics installers. One way to do this is for the manufacturer to develop installation instructions that incorporate both generalized installation guidelines and specific instructions. The generalized installation guidelines could reference standard practices used in the installation, for example aircraft electrical wire selection as specified in Advisory Circular 43.13-1B. The specific installation instructions would address more critical elements of the installation, for example guidance about antenna placement. These instructions should include procedures for determining the placement, installation, and post installation checkout of the avionics equipment. For example, post installation checkout procedures could include the following: electrical load analysis, equipment mounting/wiring testing/verification, Electro-Magnetic Interference (EMI)/Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) test, compass interference test, etc. Assistance from an avionics repair station and the local Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards Inspection Office should be obtained in developing and reviewing these instructions. It is important that the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Office (ACO) agree to the use of this process early in a project. Together they should review the installation instructions to verify their applicability for the aircraft models requested. The resulting Supplemental Type Certification, with its associated approved model list, would greatly reduce the need for the installers to request a field approval. This will save valuable resources for both industry and the Federal Aviation Administration. Non-Technical Standard Order Avionics When a Technical Standard Order does not exist for a specific avionics system, the system may be certified in accordance with the airframe/engine regulations. The Project Specific Certification Plan associated with this approval would identify certification requirements for both the avionics system and the installation of that system. The manufacturer may elect to develop the Project Specific Certification Plan in such a way that would allow the format of the Project Specific Certification Plan to be transferred to another applicant. This would allow the manufacturer to develop avionics systems for which a Technical Standard Order does not exist and without a specific installation in mind. The manufacturer would develop the product to meet requirements documented in the Project Specific Certification Plan, which would include intended functions, software level, and environmental test requirements. The manufacturer would be responsible for showing that the avionics system performs its intended function and meets its specified software and environmental requirements. This Project Specific Certification Plan would model the relevant portions of the Technical Standard Order Project Specific Certification Plan. The manufacturer would have the option of continuing the Supplemental Type Certification process or transferring the Project Specific Certification Plan to the installation company and allowing them to finish the Supplemental Type Certification process. Partnership for Safety Plans and Project Specific Certification Plans To come to an early and clear agreement on the certification process, the first plan the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant develop is the Partnership for Safety Plan (Appendix I and IV). An example of this agreement between the Federal Aviation Administration and an avionics applicant is shown in Appendix IV. It defines generic procedures to plan for product approval, establishes the general expectations or operating norms, and identifies deliverables. The Partnership for Safety Plan also defines the discipline and methodology to be used in planning and administering subsequent specific approval projects. Examples of content include generic processes and procedures for use of designees, conformity inspections, communication, issue resolution, and generic metrics for measuring project progress. Depending on the specifics of a project, two PSCPs may be recommended. The first Project Specific Certification Plan is the one that covers the Technical Standard Order Authorization (TSOA) aspects of a project. The Project Specific Certification Plan in Appendix V is for applicants wanting approval of an avionics appliance through Technical Standard Order procedures outlined in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, code of federal regulations Part 21, Subpart O. This Project Specific Certification Plan covers the design approval phase as well as the production phase of obtaining a Technical Standard Order Authorization. The Project Specific Certification Plan described in Appendix VI covers the installation approval phase of a project and is tailored for installation of avionics appliances. There may be cases when a Line Replaceable Unit (LRU) or some form of interface unit is required for an installation when there is not an applicable Technical Standard Order but still requires qualification testing. These types of Line Replaceable Units are often approved during the installation phase; therefore, in this case the certification aspects may be covered by the installation Project Specific Certification Plan. In the case where an applicant is seeking qualification of an Line Replaceable Unit (Technical Standard Order not applicable) without an installation, the Technical Standard Order Authorization Project Specific Certification Plan should be used and revised accordingly. The primary reason for not combining the two PSCPs is the approval requirements and stakeholders involved in obtaining a Technical Standard Order Authorization versus an installation approval are quite different. Additionally, the two approvals often involve different applicants. Once a Project Specific Certification Plan is developed for the installation of a specific avionics appliance, it may be used as a basis for an installation Project Specific Certification Plan by another applicant with the same installation. These PSCPs are designed to be used as project management tools providing milestones, performance measures, and information unique to obtaining a Technical Standard Order Authorization or installation approval for a certification project. It takes the generic principles and procedures outlined in the Partnership for Safety Plan and applies them to specific projects. Project Specific Certification Plan Selection It should be recognized that an avionics approval (depending on the project specifics) may take the form of one of several processes. The decision tree shown in Figure 1 is an airport information desk to determine which of the two basic PSCPs to use for a particular avionics approval. 1) Technical Standard Order Authorization (correlates to Technical Standard Order Project Specific Certification Plan block 8 in Figure 1) Technical Standard Order Authorization is a design and production approval based on meeting Federal Aviation Administration criteria, which is published in a Technical Standard Order. It is granted after the AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE and Manufacturing Inspection District Office (MIDO) review and concur with an applicant’s statement of conformance to the requirements of the Technical Standard Order. It does not include installation approval. 2) First-of-Type Supplemental Type Certification and basis for Line Replaceable Unit parts manufacturer approval if seeking parts manufacturer approval (correlates to Installation Project Specific Certification Plan block 11 in Figure 1) Supplemental Type Certification is an aircraft modification and installation approval based on the applicant showing that the modification and installation meets the minimum airworthiness requirements. parts manufacturer approval is a design and production approval that can be based on the prior approved design and installation data such as an Supplemental Type Certification. The installation approval is documented by an Supplemental Type Certification. Consequently, the parts manufacturer approval provides eligibility for installation only for the aircraft specified on the Supplemental Type Certification. 3) Follow-on Supplemental Type Certification and basis for Line Replaceable Unit parts manufacturer approval if seeking parts manufacturer approval (correlates to Installation Project Specific Certification Plan block 11 in Figure 1) Supplemental Type Certification is an aircraft modification and installation approval based on the applicant showing that the modification and installation meets the minimum airworthiness requirements. parts manufacturer approval is a design and production approval that can be based on the prior approved design and installation data such as an Supplemental Type Certification. The installation approval is documented by an Supplemental Type Certification. Consequently, the parts manufacturer approval provides eligibility for installation only for the aircraft specified on the Supplemental Type Certification. 4) “Follow-on” Field Approval via Form 337 (Does not require a Project Specific Certification Plan) A “follow-on” Field Approval is an installation approval based on a previously approved Supplemental Type Certification. The level of similarity between the candidate installation and the Supplemental Type Certification upon which the data approval is based depends on the level of complexity of the installation. There can be cases where the interface complexity is such that the data approval may rise to the level of an Supplemental Type Certification even though the product being installed is the same as the original installation. In these cases an Supplemental Type Certification application would be needed. For those less complex installations the data utilized may come from any number of sources in addition to the previously approved data. The inspector may elect to use the previously approved Supplemental Type Certification and then field approve the remaining data necessary for the installation. The inspector could also utilize Designated Engineering Representative (DER) data plus the Supplemental Type Certification data and field approve any remaining elements of the alteration not covered by these sources. (When using Supplemental Type Certification data as the basis for any approval, written permission must be obtained from the holder of the Supplemental Type Certification.) The applicant will present the Federal Aviation Administration Form 337 completed in accordance with Advisory Circular 43-9. The inspector will evaluate the data and if satisfactory will sign Block 3 of the form indicating data approval. The form will then be returned to the applicant and the alteration can be accomplished. The flight manual supplement is signed by the AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE unless a handbook bulletin or an Advisory Circular specifically authorizes the inspector to approve it. Production approvals (Technical Standard Order Authorization and PMA) always require an Federal Aviation Administration approved production system. This means the manufacturing Inspection District Office has evaluated the production quality system and found that it meets the requirements. This evaluation and finding of compliance is accomplished before the Technical Standard Order Authorization or parts manufacturer approval is granted and is included within blocks 9 and 10 in Figure 1, although it is not shown. Note that if both installation and operational approvals are desired for a Technical Standard Order product, both the Technical Standard Order Project Specific Certification Plan and installation Project Specific Certification Plan are needed as depicted by the “optional” flow out of block 9. PHASES OF AVIONICS APPROVAL The following discussion is an interpretation of the CPI phases as they apply to the approval of avionics equipment. In general, tasks, required information, deliverables, and additional criteria for success for the five CPI Phases apply also to the avionics approval process. Deliverables specific to the avionics certification process are listed in the following descriptions of the phases as they apply to avionics projects. Phase I: Conceptual Design Because avionics designs often introduce new technology, information about new designs, materials, processes, and so forth, is required. Also, proposed certification bases and means of compliance are especially important for advanced designs and are part of the required information. Any new avionics approval must consider the product design and production approval as well as the operational and installation approvals. The applicant needs to discuss these issues with the appropriate Federal Aviation Administration counterparts. This normally will involve staff within the AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE, manufacturing Inspection District Office, and Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) as well as staff within the appropriate Certification Directorate, Division, or Flight Standards Division. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant should determine the approval process path using the decision tree described in the next section. It should be clearly understood that the Federal Aviation Administration’s objective is to find compliance with the regulations and not to dictate design. Deliverables from Phase I include: • Initial Safety Assessment • Establishment of the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant project certification team • Draft critical issues list and mitigation plans • List of relevant software policy material and preliminary compliance plans (preliminary Plan for Software Aspects of Certification (PSAC)) • List of relevant human factors policy material and preliminary compliance plans • Consensus regarding which Project Specific Certification Plan(s) will be used • Determination of need for any Technical Standard Order deviations • Draft Project Specific Certification Plan(s) Phase II: Requirements Definition Efforts in this phase clarify the product definition and the associated risks, and they conclude with a mutual commitment to move forward with product approval. Specific regulatory requirements (certification basis, if applicable), means of compliance, and critical issues are revised. The Project Specific Certification Plan is refined. Deliverables from Phase II include: • Safety Assessment • Refined Project Specific Certification Plan(s) • Refined critical issues list and mitigation plans • Applicant notification of certification project initiation • Federal Aviation Administration acknowledgment of project initiation • Certification Project Notification, if applicable (Federal Aviation Administration internal step) The refined PSCPs should now include project milestones and related events such as program status reviews. Definition of project issues such as means of compliance including special conditions, equivalent safety findings, deviations, exemptions, and so forth, should be complete. However, as a project progresses to later phases, other major issues may be identified. Unanticipated issues should be resolved as quickly as possible; developing a plan to achieve resolution fits the intent of CPI. Follow-on Field Approval issues should be identified and coordinated with the appropriate contacts from the Federal Aviation Administration’s Flight Standards Division at this point. Phase III: Compliance Planning Deliverables from Phase III include: • Signed Project Specific Certification Plan (See Appendices V & VI) • Project schedule with established Federal Aviation Administration/applicant milestones for completion of analyses, test plan submission, Type Inspection Authorization, conformities, flight test, Aircraft Evaluation Groupevaluations • Updated critical issues list and resolution plan • Compliance Check List • Defined delegations and oversight criteria • Resource requirements • Conformity procedures • Refined operational and installation issues Phase IV: Implementation Deliverables from Phase IV include: • Completed test plans/reports, conformity requests, inspections, and compliance documentation • Compliance and conformance findings • TSO/JTSO required data submittal • Quality Control System Manual • Issue Papers, Exemptions, Equivalent Safety Findings • Technical Standard Order Authorization • Instructions for Continued Airworthiness • Issued Supplemental Type Certificate Phase V: Post Certification Deliverables from Phase V include: Project Closure • Project Lessons Learned • Revisions to Partnership for Safety Plan resulting from lessons learned • Project Evaluation Form(s) Continued Airworthiness • Approval of design changes • Applicant’s submittal of reporting of failures, malfunctions, and defects in accordance with 14 code of federal regulations Part 21, § 21.3 • Federal Aviation Administration review of data submitted in support of 14 code of federal regulations Part 21, § 21.3 • Applicant’s development of service bulletins or other service related documents, as applicable • Federal Aviation Administration response to applicant regarding service related issues • Federal Aviation Administration issuance of airworthiness directives, as applicable • Federal Aviation Administration notification to other civil aviation authorities of service related issues ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES General roles and responsibilities for each of the partnership stakeholders are presented in The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. These principles of teamwork, communication, and accountability apply equally to the avionics approval process. In some cases, specific roles and responsibilities may be somewhat different for avionics approval and are denoted in the appropriate sections. Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Management The applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration work to establish a Partnership for Safety Plan to reach a clear common understanding of their respective responsibilities for the design and production definition and the approval requirements. The respective managements provide leadership and resources to product approval teams through the Project Managers (PM) in order to resolve issues and accomplish the project. The management has ultimate responsibility through the product approval team for the quality of compliance finding work, standard application of regulatory compliance policy and procedures, and the timely, efficient completion of the product approval projects. It is important to ensure that appropriate managers provide the commitment necessary to accomplish the approval goals. For projects such as advanced avionics, it is essential that Federal Aviation Administration management in the Flight Standards Division support the process because of the important reliance on operational and installation issues. Within Aircraft Certification, the Aircraft Engineering Division will play an important role in the process. Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Managers The Federal Aviation Administration, designees, and applicant’s Project Managers are the principal focal points for the project. They coordinate and direct the certification team’s effort and ensure things are kept moving to achieve the product approval objectives. The PMs ensure the right people from the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant are involved in the project. The PMs develop and maintain the Project Specific Certification Plan (See Appendices V and VI). The PMs ensure that the Product Certification Project team is aware of design features, proposed means of compliance, new materials, new production processes, co-production or foreign supplier issues, and other critical issues for timely resolution. The PMs ensure effective communication flow and quality documentation among specialists, Federal Aviation Administration offices, and the applicant. The PMs are also responsible for coordinating new design features with the responsible Federal Aviation Administration offices, participating in the development of new project-specific policy safety issues, and coordinating technical decisions and regulatory issues with their respective team members. Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Engineers The Federal Aviation Administration engineers, as assigned for appropriate disciplines, are the principal contacts for the applicant's engineers. Their activity is always in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration’s and the applicant’s Project Managers and follows the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan. The engineers and Designees understand the technical details of the project, application of applicable rules and policy, and are responsible for the majority of the compliance findings associated with the project. Directorate Standards Staff The directorate Standards Staff provides the certification team with clear and timely regulatory and policy guidance specific to the project. The Project Officer is the focal point within the accountable project directorate for that policy. The directorate ensures timely support of the project regulatory and policy development for installation of new systems. The directorate provides guidance on standardized application of rules and policy. The directorate ensures that last minute changes in policy are applied to the applicant’s products only when critical new safety issues are identified, that is, the potential for an accident or service difficulty sufficient to warrant Airworthiness Directive action if the product were in service. Aircraft Engineering Division The Aircraft Engineering Division provides the certification team with clear and timely Technical Standard Order regulatory and policy guidance specific to the project. The Avionics Systems Branch within that Division approves all Technical Standard Order deviations. That branch also ensures timely response to requests for Technical Standard Order deviations. The Avionics Systems Branch also provides guidance on standardized application of rules and policy for avionics related issues. Federal Aviation Administration Manufacturing Inspection The Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors provide consultation and advice on production processes proposed in the design. They conduct and oversee, through designees, a variety of conformity inspections and evaluations of aircraft airworthiness, and they issues airworthiness certificates or other approvals. They conduct evaluations of the manufacturer’s quality and production systems for eventual production approval. Federal Aviation Administration Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor The Chief Scientific and Technical Advisors (CSTAs) play a technical leadership role within the Federal Aviation Administration and with industry in the design and development of aircraft and in the application of regulatory policies and practices for certification of state-of-the-art technology. CSTAs in disciplines pertinent to Avionics Approvals are: Flight Deck Human Factors; Aircraft Computer Software; Flight Management; Advanced Avionics/Electrical; Electromagnetic Interference; and Aeronautical Communications. CSTAs provide professional technical guidance, advice, and assistance in their discipline to the certification team on issues that require precedent setting means of compliance relating to new or complex technology and technical specialties. Technical areas specific to avionics equipment approval that require early involvement by specialists include software and human factors. Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation Group The Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG) provides a link to applicable Flight Standards Service technical services. The Aircraft Evaluation Groupserves as the focal point for all Flight Standards interests in the approval process. They Flight Standard personnel assist engineers in determining that means of compliance meet operations and maintenance requirements. They work with the Flight Standards Flight Technologies and Procedures Division to ensure that requirements and policies affecting new avionics equipment are fully coordinated with the applicant. Federal Aviation Administration Flight Technologies and Procedures Division The Federal Aviation Administration Flight Technologies and Procedures Division (Flight Standards Service-400) is the principal organization in the Flight Standards Service that develops Federal Aviation Administration requirements and policies for the operational certification, implementation, and approval of advanced CNS technology. They participate in a “hands-on” manner with the aviation community in the testing, prototyping, research, engineering, and development of new flight technologies and procedures. Flight Standards Service-400 interfaces daily with numerous other government and industry partners and stakeholders on national and international levels to achieve the introduction of new CNS technology into global all weather operating environments. APPENDIX IV AVIONICS PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY PLAN between the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION and APPLICANT The material contained herein is an airport information desk for constructing a Partnership for Safety Plan (Partnership for Safety Plan) between the Federal Aviation Administration and avionics equipment applicants. This airport information desk is intentionally not a “boilerplate,” but it allows the freedom to innovate and meet the needs of the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration. However, it is essential that the Partnership for Safety Plan addresses the same key content areas of this airport information desk ensuring that, as written, it captures the meaning and intent of this guide. TABLE OF CONTENTS PURPOSE EFFECTIVITY PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY 1. General 2. Corporate Planning 3. Communication and Coordination 4. Delegation 5. Production Quality System Evaluation 6. Transition Plan CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. Issues Resolution Process 2. Performance measures a. General b. Operating Norms c. Phase Evaluation Checklist SIGNATORIES PURPOSE The purpose of this Partnership for Safety Plan (Partnership for Safety Plan) is to define a working relationship between the Aircraft Certification Service of the Federal Aviation Administration (Federal Aviation Administration) and the applicant. It provides the foundation from which to build mutual trust, leadership, teamwork, and efficient business practices. The scope of this Partnership for Safety Plan is intended to cover the working relationship between the Federal Aviation Administration and an applicant seeking Federal Aviation Administration approval for avionics equipment. The applicant may be either an avionics manufacturer or installer, or both. The types of Federal Aviation Administration approval may include a Technical Standard Order (TSO) Authorization, Supplemental Type Certificate (Supplemental Type Certification), or Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA). The avionics approval may involve one or more of these types of Federal Aviation Administration approvals depending on the type of avionics equipment (whether a Technical Standard Order exists), and whether the applicant is seeking an installation approval. Avionics approvals typically include a component level design and manufacturing approval (Technical Standard Order or PMA), and an installation approval (Supplemental Type Certification or field approval). The needs of the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration may vary from project to project. If an applicant already has a Partnership for Safety Plan with the Federal Aviation Administration, the content of this guide may be used to refine the existing Partnership for Safety Plan and to consider the alternate paths to approvals and certifications described herein. This Plan enables the Federal Aviation Administration, the applicant, and their staffs to expedite approval projects by focusing on safety significant issues. It is the mutual goal of the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant to meet or exceed the expectations of this agreement to achieve the following vision. Vision of the Product Approval Process A credible and concise product approval process that results in all of the following: Timely and efficient product type design and production approvals Clearly defined and understood roles, responsibilities, and accountability of all stakeholders Timely identification and resolution of the certification basis, potential safety issues, and business practice requirements Optimal delegation using safety management concepts with appropriate controls and oversight In the establishment of this Partnership for Safety Plan, it is understood that a cooperative working relationship is required for this process to be effective. To successfully achieve this Vision, it is understood that the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration team members will work in accordance with the guidelines contained in this Partnership for Safety Plan. EFFECTIVITY This Partnership for Safety Plan becomes effective upon approval by the Federal Aviation Administration Directorate/Division Manager and the applicant’s President, Chief Executive Officer (CEO), or Senior Vice President (VP), or officer empowered to commit for the applicant. It continues in effect until it is superseded, revised or terminated and may be amended by mutual consent of the parties. Any change in the services furnished or other provisions of this Partnership for Safety Plan is formalized by an appropriate written amendment signed by both parties, which outlines the nature of the change. PARTNERSHIP FOR SAFETY 1. General This Partnership for Safety Plan is a living document developed by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant to the greatest extent possible in advance of any specific approval project. The Partnership for Safety Plan is an important prerequisite to a specific product approval project. It establishes the principles and procedures for early identification of critical issues and early planning so that, subsequent to this Partnership for Safety Plan, future projects can be completed in a timely and efficient fashion. The Partnership for Safety Plan will be managed and maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration’s and the applicant’s management focal points in accordance with the “Communications” section below. The Partnership for Safety Plan will include, but not be limited to, consideration of the elements outlined below. The applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration agree to work to the principles and operational norms outlined in this Partnership for Safety Plan and to future Project Specific Certification Plans (PSCP) that may be developed in conjunction with this agreement. The Partnership for Safety Plan should also define the process for determining when a Project Specific Certification Plan is not required for a specific project. For, example, minor changes as defined in 14 code of federal regulations Part 21, § 21.93, paragraph (a), and § 21.611, paragraph (a), would not require the development of a Project Specific Certification Plan. The Partnership for Safety Plan should also address the process used for the incorporation and approval of minor changes. The Project Specific Certification Plan is discussed in Appendix II, V, and VI of The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. The principles of CPI are such that an applicant needs only one Partnership for Safety Plan with the Federal Aviation Administration. Since the Partnership for Safety Plan is used to define communication, coordination, and delegation between the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration, it needs to be accepted by the relevant organizations that will use it. If the applicant is likely to have approval projects with more than one Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Office (ACO) or Manufacturing Inspection District Office (MIDO), the Partnership for Safety Plan should be developed with the secondary Federal Aviation Administration offices involved as well. If an applicant’s organizational structure is such that lines of business work independently with their respective Federal Aviation Administration offices, then separate PSPs may be appropriate. Alternately, a Partnership for Safety Plan agreement with the primary Federal Aviation Administration office may be used as the basis for a Partnership for Safety Plan with other offices. When an applicant requires involvement with additional Federal Aviation Administration offices, the applicant should share with those offices any existing agreements with the Federal Aviation Administration, such as PSPs or PSCPs. This is especially important when an applicant and an AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE agree to a process for an avionics installation and then the applicant seeks approval for a similar process with another AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE. 2. Corporate Planning The applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration jointly conduct periodic management program reviews using an agreed process to provide early insight into future potential projects. These reviews also provide a forum to begin early planning for those potential projects as outlined in the early involvement Phases of The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. The reviews would, to the extent possible, touch broadly on areas that should require special attention, for example, special conditions, exemptions, equivalent safety findings, unique designs, new materials or processes, production or operational aspects, foreign validation, co-production or use of foreign suppliers, and continued airworthiness. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant will participate in early identification of product concepts, applicable standards, and in the product definition and risk management phases. This will be accomplished as potential approval projects arise to ensure agreement and commitment on dealing with critical issues in a value-added way. This is an iterative process requiring ongoing mutual evaluation and continuous improvement of the Partnership for Safety Plan and related processes. The Partnership for Safety Plan gives the Federal Aviation Administration a means to keep the applicant informed of new proposed regulations or policy that could affect future product approval projects. The Partnership for Safety Plan should document the agreement between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant regarding the use of a Project Specific Certification Plan. As noted above, some Technical Standard Order projects and Supplemental Type Certification changes may not require a Project Specific Certification Plan. Although the preference would be to always use a Project Specific Certification Plan, a cost/benefit analysis may show a low return on investment for less complex or recurring Technical Standard Order Authorization projects. With this in mind, the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration should work together to ensure developing and using the Project Specific Certification Plan is efficient and commensurate with the project. The point is that a Project Specific Certification Plan should add value to the process by improving project efficiency for both the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration. Project tracking and documentation provide for early identification and resolution of potential conflicts. Early communication between the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration in the conceptual/prototype stages of product development is critical to ensure availability of resources, adequate planning, and flexibility for both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant. Effective project management oversight, planning, communication, and documentation are needed. This process is management and discipline dependent. Avionics equipment may require one or more PSCPs, depending on the type of project. For clarity and agreement between the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration, the Partnership for Safety Plan should include content to help all stakeholders decide which Project Specific Certification Plan to use. The Technical Standard Order Project Specific Certification Plan is specifically for products where a Technical Standard Order exists and a Technical Standard Order Authorization is to be issued for design and manufacturing approval. The Installation Project Specific Certification Plan should be used where the project will result in one of the following: First-of-Type Supplemental Type Certification and basis for Line Replaceable Unit parts manufacturer approval if seeking PMA, or Follow-on Supplemental Type Certification and basis for Line Replaceable Unit parts manufacturer approval if seeking PMA. Typical projects that may not require a Project Specific Certification Plan include, but are not limited to: minor changes to existing TSOs or STCs and Technical Standard Order projects that have been previously approved by the applicant at the same AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE. Projects that may not benefit by having a Project Specific Certification Plan are those low in complexity with little risk regarding the approval process or interpretation of the requirements for airworthiness. 3. Communication and Coordination In the Partnership for Safety Plan, communication and coordination paths should be clearly defined between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant. Focal points will be identified to avoid conflict and to keep both parties informed of all critical communications that affect the needs and responsibilities of their respective roles. This does not preclude any team members from communicating with any other members, but they need to ensure the focal points are informed. Thus, critical links should be defined to ensure roles and responsibilities are clear and to facilitate conflict resolution. The focal points will be responsible for the maintenance of the Partnership for Safety Plan. The Partnership for Safety Plan should identify each organization that is responsible for elements in the approval process and the responsibility those organizations share in the approval of the product. The roles and responsibilities of each organization should be clearly stated in the Partnership for Safety Plan. In the approval process of avionics, several Federal Aviation Administration organizations are responsible for different aspects of the approval. For example, the office responsible for developing the Technical Standard Order and approving deviations related to any Technical Standard Order is the Aircraft Engineering Division within the Aircraft Certification Service. This division is also responsible for developing policy as it relates to the avionics appliance. The regulations and policy for installation of avionics into an aircraft falls under the responsibility of the directorates within Aircraft Certification. The type of aircraft in which the avionics are installed determines the accountable directorate: Small airplanes – Small Airplane Directorate Transport airplanes – Transport Airplane Directorate Rotorcraft – Rotorcraft Directorate Installations specific to engines or propellers – Engine and Propeller Directorate Each directorate is also responsible for supporting certain AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICEs and manufacturing Inspection District Offices to provide the Federal Aviation Administration resources to support the applicants’ projects. The AIRCRAFT CERTIFICATION OFFICE is responsible for determining that the avionics and installation complies with the required regulations and policies. Operational issues during the approval process are the responsibility of the Flight Standards Aircraft Evaluation Group. The approval for avionics production is the responsibility of the manufacturing Inspection District Office. The Project Specific Certification Plan should identify what is expected from each of these organizations. 4. Delegation The Federal Aviation Administration depends on using both individual and organizational delegations in the approval process. Delegation will be used to the maximum extent practicable with appropriate oversight safeguards as defined in the Federal Aviation Administration’s delegation management process policies. A Designated Alteration Station (DAS) is an organization that is delegated to issue STCs in accordance with an Federal Aviation Administration approved procedures manual. The Federal Aviation Administration approved DAS procedures manual is, in effect, a partnership between the DAS and the Federal Aviation Administration. An existing approved procedures manual, for a DAS or any other Federal Aviation Administration organizational delegation, may be incorporated by reference in the applicant’s Partnership for Safety Plan but is not a substitute for the Partnership for Safety Plan. This concept would also apply to other delegated organizations. The following paragraphs are applicable to individual designees. The Federal Aviation Administration engineering and Aviation Safety Inspectors’ designees, designee oversight controls, related documentation, and so forth, should be identified and agreed upon early, preferably prior to a specific project. This should also include, by reference, reliance on existing agreements or working procedures generated between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant, where appropriate. The Partnership for Safety Plan should be specific as to what aspects of the Federal Aviation Administration project responsibilities are delegated, and should address the delegation and oversight process as well as designees’ disciplines and limitations. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to manage all designee activity within the regulations and policy regarding designee appointment, procedures, and oversight. The expanded use of designees in the approval process is an important part of streamlining the avionics certification process. The Federal Aviation Administration continues to explore ways to expand the use of DERs to help reduce the review time necessary for granting Technical Standard Order authorization. When an applicant requests a Technical Standard Order Authorization they should work closely with the Federal Aviation Administration to determine the scope of delegation the Federal Aviation Administration will authorize. The Federal Aviation Administration will explain the latest policies regarding use of DERs in this process, what authorizations are needed, and how best to utilize DERs in a project approval process. It is essential that the Federal Aviation Administration and the public have confidence in the integrity of the designee system and that it function properly. Both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to foster an environment where open communication between the designees and the applicant’s management, and between the designees and their Federal Aviation Administration counterparts, is standard practice. That environment should encourage the designees, within the scope of their delegation, to openly communicate approval items with the Federal Aviation Administration, which is necessary to maintain confidence in the designee system. The applicant agrees to create a working environment where designees can make compliance and conformity findings free from undue pressure and with the support and knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration. It should be clearly understood that the Federal Aviation Administration’s objective is to find compliance with the regulations and not to dictate design. Because of the close integration of the design, production, and continued airworthiness processes, it is necessary to have all stakeholders in the delegation process agree on the extent of delegation, the procedures, and the degree of delegation oversight to be used in each project. The applicant and Federal Aviation Administration engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, flight test pilots, and Federal Aviation Administration designees will agree upon and document a plan. This plan will describe how the designees in different disciplines will work together directly to the greatest extent possible to ensure compliance with Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations while providing more timely project management. The Partnership for Safety Plan should also describe the respective Federal Aviation Administration and applicant roles in the conformity inspection process. As noted in applicable Federal Aviation Administration Orders and policy, the goal of the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant is to develop a system that ensures conforming products, and one that the Federal Aviation Administration can rely upon, to the greatest extent possible, using the designees with appropriate oversight to expedite the work. This should include, in coordination with the delegation section of the Partnership for Safety Plan, criteria for determining which conformities will be conducted, which are delegated to both engineering and Aviation Safety Inspectors’ designees, and how deviations will be dispositioned. The system should include, but is not limited to: Maintaining the custody chain of conformed articles destined for an official Federal Aviation Administration test. Notifying the Federal Aviation Administration Manufacturing Aviation Safety Inspector of any changes to ground/flight test articles after conformity inspection has been completed. Ensuring requests are not duplicated and the timely and efficient conduct of conformities and dispositioning of deviations. Identifying who issues the requests, conducts the inspections, and dispositions the deviations. Providing for the completion of inspection, documentation, and dispositioning of deviations or changes before tests are conducted. 5. Production Quality System Evaluation The Partnership for Safety Plan should describe the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s roles in the production approval process. The goal of the Federal Aviation Administration production approval is to verify that the applicant has established a system which ensures that only products and parts conforming to the Federal Aviation Administration approved design are released to service. Evaluations to determine adequacy of this system should be conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration as early as feasible during the project, where practicable. The Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors’ designees, with appropriate oversight, could be used to facilitate the work. 6. Transition Plan It is recommended that the Aircraft Certification Office assign all of an applicant’s projects to the same team of engineers. However, it is recognized that the Aircraft Certification Office and the applicant’s personnel may be reassigned or leave the organization. To minimize disruption of a project and maintain continuity throughout the approval process, a transition plan should be implemented when Aircraft Certification Office/ applicant project personnel are replaced. The following is a recommended plan: 1. The Aircraft Certification Office/ applicant will be notified of any changes to the project personnel within a prescribed time frame prior to the change, when possible. (For example, 2 weeks.) 2. During the prescribed period, new personnel will be trained on the contents of this Partnership for Safety Plan. 3. During this period, new personnel will be briefed on the status of all the applicant’s projects (including the applicant’s drawing, data, and document system). 4. Incoming personnel shall accept previous formally communicated and agreed to positions. 5. A meeting between the Aircraft Certification Office and the applicant with new and remaining personnel will be conducted to review all ongoing projects and to review this Partnership for Safety Plan so that all personnel involved will have a common understanding of the Partnership for Safety Plan. 6. Individuals assigned to perform a backup role will have the background and authority to make decisions during personnel absences. CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. Issues Resolution Process The objective of this process is to identify and resolve issues and disagreements as early as possible at the team working level facilitated by the applicant’s and the Federal Aviation Administration’s PMs. The applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration PMs will jointly maintain a project issues tracking list. They will continually manage those issues to ensure adequate progress is being made on the resolution of issues to ensure compliance with the regulations while not adversely affecting project schedules. The PMs will periodically keep their management and other certification team members apprised of the progress on resolving issues. If there is agreement on the progress of issues resolution, the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration PMs will document the actions, decisions, and outcomes in the project records. Any necessary changes to the project schedule or the issues will be coordinated and agreed upon by all affected team members. Should any problems arise with open issues where their resolution is not proceeding according to the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan, the PMs will utilize the following issues resolution process: 1. If there is disagreement, the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration PMs, their respective managers, and other appropriate team members in the affected disciplines will review the issue and recommend a solution. If they agree, the resolution will be documented and all team members will be informed. 2. If the managers and appropriate team members are unable to agree, the office raising the concerns will prepare a white paper detailing the issue, respective parties’ positions, and options for resolution. Timelines will be established for resolution of each issue to permit tracking via the project issues list and ensure timely resolution. Where appropriate, the Federal Aviation Administration Issue Paper process should be used, but it should not be applied just for the sake of tracking, which can be done through the project issues tracking list maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant PMs. 3. The issue will then be submitted to the applicable directorate manager(s), the Federal Aviation Administration, and the applicant Project Manager’s management, and, where appropriate, the Federal Aviation Administration regional counsel and other appropriate Federal Aviation Administration division(s) for review and disposition. 4. The applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration PMs will document in the project records conclusions, recommendations, and outcome of the issue resolution. 2. Performance Measures a. General Project tracking and documentation provide for early identification and resolution of potential conflicts. Early communication between the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration in the conceptual/prototype stages of product development is critical to ensure availability of resources, adequate planning, and flexibility for both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant. This process requires effective project management oversight, planning, communication, and documentation. Priority must be placed on early identification and resolution of issues critical to the success of the project. Some of these issues are listed in the Avionics Certification Process Improvement section of this guide. Performance measures should focus on producing quality deliverables that show an efficient and credible approval process. These and other project deliverables can be associated with the Phases in the approval process as delineated in this guide. Good planning will define the significant tasks, associated required information, and expectations necessary to meet the project completion objectives. The operating norms agreed upon between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant will establish the basis for operating under this Partnership for Safety Plan and subsequent PSCPs and provide a means of measuring progress. b. Operating Norms The Federal Aviation Administration will establish with the applicant agreed, documented, operating norms. These norms will guide the timeliness and quality of deliverables and services provided by both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant during the project. Operating norms should be defined to meet the needs of the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration consistent with agreed PSCPs. Many factors affect the planning and management of approval projects, such as project size and complexity, and degree of delegation. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicants recognize, for example, that certification of an advanced avionics design concept, then initial installation, may have significantly different resource needs and timing than a modification to a design or an installation. The Partnership for Safety Plan and each Project Specific Certification Plan should identify appropriate agreed operating norms since there could be different team members on different PSCPs. An agreed Partnership for Safety Plan and early pre-project communication and planning in accordance with that Partnership for Safety Plan are essential prerequisites to preparing for successful approval projects. The objective of any successful project is to meet or beat the plan. Unless compelling reasons are presented to deviate from this guide, the operating norms for certain key deliverables should be set as low as possible within the following typical ranges: Avionics Approval Process Norms Within 2 weeks after submittal of 8110-12 application: Acknowledgment of application issued. Aircraft Certification Office Project Manager determines project significance per Order 8110.4. Aircraft Certification Office issues Certification Project Notification (CPN) and sends to appropriate directorate. Aircraft Certification Office receives concurrence or non-concurrence regarding project significance from appropriate directorate (per Order 8110.4). Appropriate directorate assigns Program Officer. Within 1 month after application: Project team identified (Federal Aviation Administration and applicant). Project Specific Certification Plan drafted. Project familiarization and up-front planning meeting at Aircraft Certification Office. Within 1 month after up-front planning meeting: Certification basis identified, if applicable. Technical and certification issues are defined. Project Specific Certification Plan should be revised as appropriate to include comments and issues generated from the up-front planning meeting. Within 2 to 3 months after up-front planning meeting: Certification basis established, if applicable. Resolution of technical and certification issues. (Where resolution is not possible at this early date in the project, the issues will be carried forward in the program on the critical issues list.) Issue papers written, as appropriate. Update the project schedule, if needed. Project Specific Certification Plan agreed and signed, including the mutually agreed project schedule. 3 months prior to scheduled issuance of Type Certificate/Supplemental Type Certification/Technical Standard Order Authorization: Resolution of all remaining technical and certification issues. All issue papers closed. Update to the project schedule, if needed. One month prior to scheduled issuance of Type Certificate/Supplemental Type Certification/Technical Standard Order Authorization: All required certification inspections and tests have been completed. Compliance data and documentation is submitted. (If the data is not Federal Aviation Administration designee approved or recommended for approval, more time may be required. The use of designees should be taken into account early in the project planning and documented in the Project Specific Certification Plan.) Additional Norms: Request for a meeting should be accommodated within one month of the request. Meeting minutes should be completed, agreed upon, and signed within one month of the respective meeting. Request for a document review should be accommodated within six weeks of the request. Issue papers should be completed and released within one month of identifying the issue. Schedule slips and significant design changes will be communicated within one month of their identification. Deviation requests should be granted or denied within 6 weeks of the manufacturer’s written request to the Aircraft Certification Office(*). Federal Aviation Administration letters of Validation for non-US certifications should be provided within 3 weeks of the request. (*) For deviation requests, any request for Technical Standard Order deviation should identify the specific section in the Technical Standard Order performance standard from which the manufacturer is requesting a deviation. The request should also include the compensating equivalent means of performance proposed by the manufacturer. Additional norms may be necessary or appropriate depending upon the specific project needs. When developing a Project Specific Certification Plan, the need to define norms should be assessed for all issues identified. Any major issues, design changes, or compliance requirements should result in agreed revisions to the Project Specific Certification Plan with appropriate milestones for closure. As the project progresses, other major issues may be identified. Where appropriate, issue papers and a revised Project Specific Certification Plan will be prepared within one month after identification of the issue along with a plan to achieve its resolution. In such cases, the Federal Aviation Administration will work within boundaries of their policies and public rulemaking procedures. The Partnership for Safety Plan compels the partners to work together to understand the product architecture early enough to preclude last-minute guidance (verbal or written), new interpretations, or rule escalation that would adversely affect the mutually agreed upon program goals. c. Phase Evaluation Checklists The Phase Evaluation Checklist (Appendix VII of this guide) is a tool that can be used for project management as the project moves through the five phases. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant PMs should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the beginning of a project. The applicant/Federal Aviation Administration team should continuously evaluate the project for immediate process improvement. For long duration projects, the PMs should complete the “Deliverables” portion of the form at the end of each phase. For projects with a short completion time, the form should be completed at the end. The PMs are encouraged to include the review and update of the Phase Evaluation Checklist as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. To facilitate continuous improvement the team should implement any necessary corrective actions. The Phase Evaluation Checklist should be maintained in the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant’s official project file for future national or local program evaluation. When the evaluation identifies the need for corrective actions or improvements, it should be included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future reference. A copy of the form should also be sent to the Federal Aviation Administration’s Aircraft Engineering Division, Aircraft Certification Service-100, for Federal Aviation Administration and industry review of the CPI process. SIGNATORIES The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to the provisions of this Partnership for Safety Plan as indicated by the signature of their duly authorized representatives. Agreed by: (This is a representative sample of possible signatories and could include others deemed appropriate to provide necessary commitments and accountability. Include Names and date) Applicant President, CEO, or Senior VP Applicant Certification Manager Applicant VP Quality Assurance Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation GroupManager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Directorate/Division Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Office Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration MIO/manufacturing Inspection District Office Manager(s) APPENDIX V PROJECT SPECIFIC CERTIFICATION PLAN for Technical Standard Order Authorization between the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION and APPLICANT (Specify Name) for (List specific product here) The material contained herein is an airport information desk for preparing the Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP) for a product being approved under 14 code of federal regulations Part 21, Subpart O, Technical Standard Order Authorizations. This airport information desk is intentionally not a “boilerplate,” but allows the freedom to innovate and meet the special project needs of the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration. However, it is essential that the Project Specific Certification Plan addresses the same key content areas of this airport information desk ensuring that, as written, it captures the meaning and intent of this guide. The Project Specific Certification Plan should include elements that were not addressed in detail in the Partnership for Safety Plan, and it should incorporate by reference appropriate procedures, agreements, or other elements pertinent to the project. TABLE OF CONTENTS PURPOSE EFFECTIVITY PRODUCT APPROVAL 1. Project Description 2. Project Schedule 3. technical standard order and JTSO Application and Means of Compliance a. Technical Standard Order Application b. Technical Standard Order Table and Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) 4. Communication and Responsibilities a. Communication b. Roles and Responsibilities 5. Delegation 6. Testing Plan a. General b. Flight Test c. Configuration Control 7. Compliance Documentation PRODUCTION APPROVAL POST APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS – COMPLIANCE SUMMARY DOCUMENT PROJECT ISSUES PLANNING CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. General 2. Phase Evaluation Checklist SIGNATORIES PURPOSE The purpose of this Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP) is to define and document a product approval plan between the Aircraft Certification Service of the Federal Aviation Administration (Federal Aviation Administration) and the applicant. The plan should expedite the issuance of Technical Standard Order Authorization (TSOA) for the applicant’s (specify Line Replaceable Unit or system) under standardized procedures. The applicant is (specify applicant’s name and location of manufacturing). If an installation is being worked as a parallel project, it should be stated as follows: As a parallel certification project, the installation approval will be covered by a stand-alone Project Specific Certification Plan. This Project Specific Certification Plan will provide the foundation from which to build mutual trust, teamwork, and efficient business practices between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant during approval of the product. It is the mutual goal of all team members to meet or exceed the expectations of this agreement. It is understood that this Project Specific Certification Plan will be executed in accordance with the Partnership for Safety Plan. However, there are certain situations where a Partnership for Safety Plan is not warranted. In these situations, those applicable sections for a Partnership for Safety Plan must be incorporated into this Project Specific Certification Plan. (Only use the following sentence if a Partnership for Safety Plan has not been developed:) There is no current Partnership for Safety Plan with (specify applicant), but specific sections have to be added in this Project Specific Certification Plan that include the CPI principles normally contained in a stand-alone Partnership for Safety Plan. In the establishment of this Project Specific Certification Plan, it is understood that a cooperative working relationship is beneficial for these procedures to be effective. To implement the Project Specific Certification Plan procedures successfully, it is understood that both the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration team members shall work in accordance with the established guidelines. The Federal Aviation Administration team members will recognize and utilize the knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration designees to the greatest extent possible and keep the applicant’s team members abreast of approval issues that may arise. The Project Specific Certification Plan schedule will be within specified ranges agreed to in the norms of the Partnership for Safety Plan. Additional milestones will be considered by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant as firm commitments unless they agree to a change. It is intended that all team members facilitate review and approval of the necessary design and production data and related compliance documents in a timely manner with the objective of bettering the Project Specific Certification Plan schedule wherever possible. The Project Specific Certification Plan is a living document. This means that if both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree that modification of the Plan is needed, an amended Plan is drafted. The Plan will be developed to the greatest extent possible as soon as the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree that the approval project is a viable one for which resources can be planned and committed for its completion. As the project progresses, the Project Specific Certification Plan will be managed and maintained jointly by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s Project Managers. EFFECTIVITY This Project Specific Certification Plan shall become effective upon approval by the Managers of the (specify name of Aircraft Certification Office) Aircraft Certification Office, the appropriate Standards Office (Directorate or Aircraft Engineering Division), the (specify name of manufacturing Inspection District Office) Manufacturing Inspection District Office, the (specify name ofAEG) Aircraft Evaluation Group, and the applicant’s Certification or Airworthiness Manager. This Project Specific Certification Plan may be amended by mutual agreement or terminated by either the applicant or the Federal Aviation Administration. This Project Specific Certification Plan will continue in effect throughout all Phases of the product approval unless it is superseded, revised, or terminated with written notice by either the applicant or the Federal Aviation Administration. Any change in the services furnished or other provisions of this Project Specific Certification Plan will be formalized by an appropriate written amendment signed by affected parties, which will outline the nature of the change. PRODUCT APPROVAL 1. Project Description This section should contain a description of the project. It should include a listing of the TSOs being applied for. The Plan should include a detailed description of the product. The description should consider the annunciation, control, and display requirements specified in the Technical Standard Order standard and its intended installation environment. The level of software assurance used should support those requirements and be clearly identified in the Technical Standard Order software documentation and installation instructions. The description should also include a detailed list of all systems functionality with an indication of any functionality that is not covered under Technical Standard Order. The intended uses of each function should be documented, as well as the operational assumptions. This detailed function or features list is critical as it will help focus the Federal Aviation Administration evaluations on the extra functionality early in the program, leaving the applicant with the traditional role in the Technical Standard Order process focusing on ensuring compliance with the Technical Standard Order requirements. 2. Project Schedule A detailed project schedule should be provided as an appendix to the Project Specific Certification Plan. It should identify all major milestones, including appropriate project management reviews and any required scheduled deliverables such as those listed below. (Being in an appendix will facilitate schedule changes without having to revise the Project Specific Certification Plan.) If required, these milestones need to be established in accordance with the operating norms identified in the Partnership for Safety Plan. Every effort must be made to establish realistic schedules considering both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s total workloads and other resource commitments. Design, production, operational, and maintenance aspects, as well as foreign authority validation requirements, should be planned for and considered. All issue papers, if applicable, should also be included with a resolution plan and prioritization of the issues to be resolved. The schedule should adhere to the Phases and process flow identified in The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. This would include identifying in the schedule all appropriate deliverables for the project such as, but not limited to, those shown below: Deliverables: Familiarization, up-front planning, and technical meeting(s) minutes Roles and responsibilities of Federal Aviation Administration and applicant project teams Product approval team and management status reviews Delegation plan Draft and Final Project Specific Certification Plan Applicant’s Technical Standard Order Statement of Conformance Listing of specific TSOs being applied for A listing of deviations, as applicable, to the Technical Standard Order performance standards Letter accepting Technical Standard Order deviations Compliance Summary Document Quality Control Procedures Production approvals Data submittals (to support compliance and conformance (e.g., test plans/reports, analyses, installation instructions, operating manual, etc.) Human Factors Approval Plan, if applicable Other data required by applicable Technical Standard Order Technical Standard Order Authorization letter Foreign approvals anticipated that will involve the Aircraft Certification Office List of specific Joint Airworthiness Authorities (JAA) TSOs (JTSO) being applied for including a listing of deviations, if any, to the JTSO performance standards Foreign approval compliance documentation list Letters of conformance and application for the foreign approvals Federal Aviation Administration letters of validation for the foreign approvals Phase Evaluation Checklist 3. Technical Standard Order and JTSO Application and Means of Compliance a. Technical Standard Order Application In this section the applicant should identify the Technical Standard Order authorization requested. The applicant should also identify if a JTSO authorization is to be requested. The certification basis should also be identified, along with any requested deviations. The Certification Basis of obtaining a Technical Standard Order is 14 code of federal regulations Part 21, Subpart O, the applicable TSOs. When making application for a Technical Standard Order the applicant submits: 1) A statement of conformance certifying that the applicant has met the requirements of Part 21, Subpart O, and 2) A statement certifying that the article concerned meets the applicable Technical Standard Order that is effective on the date of application for that article. The application, if applicable, includes the listing of deviations to the Technical Standard Order and equivalent safety findings, if any. An issues list should be included to highlight for resolution those special requirements and other areas that may be significant, even though they may not warrant a special condition, exemption, or equivalent safety finding. The Certification Basis of obtaining a JTSO is JAR Part 21, Subparts N-O, and the applicable JTSOs. Application is made by letter to the Aircraft Certification Office and includes: A copy of the statement of conformance that certifies the applicant has met the requirements of JAR 21, Subpart N-O, that the article concerned meets the applicable JTSO, and lists any deviations from the JTSO requirements. A copy of the list that shows the compliance data provided to the National Airworthiness Authority (NAA) by the Federal Aviation Administration or the applicant. The Aircraft Certification Office issues a letter of validation to the National Airworthiness Authority responsible for JTSO approval. Other non-U.S. approvals require a process similar to the JTSO process. These applications are made to the Aircraft Certification Office and result in an approval on an individual country basis (national approval). These approvals do not confer a Technical Standard Order or JTSO authorization. The Federal Aviation Administration maintains advisory documents that explain procedures required for different countries. b. Technical Standard Order Table and Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS) A table that lists the applicable Technical Standard Order requirements should be used. This table should identify the requirements and the means used to show compliance to the requirement. 4. Communication and Responsibilities a. Communication This section describes the communication responsibilities of the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s certification teams. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant establish the appropriate communication and coordination paths by identifying the respective team members. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s PMs must be kept informed of all critical communications. Critical links should be defined to ensure that roles and responsibilities are clear to define accountable team members responsible for deliverables and to facilitate conflict resolution. This does not preclude any team member from communicating with any other member, but they need to ensure the PMs are informed. Team members typically will communicate with the PMs via email and telephone. b. Roles and Responsibilities This section describes the roles and responsibilities of the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration team members. Table 1 is a sample of the typical table to show the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant team members and their roles and responsibilities. Please note that your program may require team members with different roles and responsibilities than those listed in the sample shown in Table 1. In some cases, additional members should be included. For instance, the project may require Federal Aviation Administration or applicant legal representatives on a consultation basis. If international certification is involved, other authorities should be included. This is especially important if assistance with test witnessing, conformity inspections, or type certification validations in anticipated. 5. Delegation A Technical Standard Order program is a self-certified process where the applicant makes conformance statements to the Federal Aviation Administration indicating compliance with those items listed in 14 code of federal regulations Part 21 § 21.605 and to the applicable Technical Standard Order. However, the process may be difficult if the Technical Standard Order applicant is new to this process or has limited knowledge of the Technical Standard Order certification process. In this case, it may be helpful for the applicant to become familiar with the certification process or use a designee who is familiar with the process to review the data that is to be submitted to support the project. The expanded use of designees in the approval process is an important part of streamlining the avionics certification process. The Federal Aviation Administration continues to explore ways to expand the use of DERs to help reduce the review time necessary for granting Technical Standard Order authorization. When an applicant requests a Technical Standard Order Authorization, they should work closely with the Federal Aviation Administration to determine the scope of delegation the Federal Aviation Administration will authorize. The Federal Aviation Administration will explain the latest policies regarding use of DERs in this process, what authorizations are needed, and how best to utilize DERs in a project approval process. 6. Testing Plan a. General This section should outline the applicant’s approach to developing test-based compliance documentation. Plans for Hardware and Software Aspects of Certification (PHAC and PSAC respectively) are typical means used to identify Verification and Validation (V&V) methodologies. This portion of the Project Specific Certification Plan should also consider the requirements of the specific Technical Standard Order and associated MOPs where performance under normal and severe environmental conditions is concerned. A strategy for the planning, preparation, and conduct of the required environmental and qualification testing would be appropriate content. The plan should identify the proposed methods for evaluating the flight crew interface aspects of the product. The plan should address the occasions when and how Federal Aviation Administration human factors evaluations are to occur, and recognize that the findings from such evaluations need to be documented and validated to ensure appropriate "credit" will be evaluated if needed for subsequent installation approvals. b. Flight Test In some cases – such as for Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) products – flight tests are necessary to provide compliance data. While Federal Aviation Administration participation in these flight tests is not required, the responsible Aircraft Certification Office office may have an interest in observing use of the product in its actual operating environment. This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should specify how to accommodate such requests. Where a concurrent aircraft level project (Supplemental Type Certification) has been initiated, use of language in the project’s Type Inspection Authorization may be used to enable Federal Aviation Administration participation. This will also facilitate the applicant’s ability to take credit for these tests as part of the Supplemental Type Certification project. Since a Type Inspection Authorization is not necessary to authorize the applicant’s conduct of flight tests associated with gathering Technical Standard Order compliance data, special approval may be needed for Aircraft Certification Office personnel to participate in flight tests that are solely in support of a Technical Standard Order project. This issue should be negotiated with the responsible Aircraft Certification Office manager early on in the Technical Standard Order project. The need for evaluation of the product’s human factors attributes should also be addressed in this section. Many new and revised TSOs contain requirements for human centered design considerations. In addition, some Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Offices are including this type of evaluation as a part of the Technical Standard Order project where the product has a major man-machine interface element (such as display systems). This item should be discussed with the Aircraft Certification Office early in the project’s life cycle. For some products, use of a bench simulator or demonstrator may be adequate. Others may require a combination of bench and flight test evaluations. Where flight test human factor assessments are warranted, a plan for Federal Aviation Administration participation similar to that described immediately above may be needed. c. Configuration Control Articles used for compliance testing must be subject to a control process to ensure an accurate accounting of their configuration. This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should indicate the process/procedure to be used. Where an Federal Aviation Administration-approved company quality control system exists, an inspection conducted in accordance with that system and resulting in a Certificate of Conformity is typically adequate. In general, all drawings, specifications, and other documentation defining the hardware and software design of the article should be released into the applicant’s configuration control system prior to conducting any conformity inspection. An inspection process involving manufacturing Inspection District Office personnel, or resulting in an 8100-1 Conformity Report or 8130-3 conformity finding, is not required. However, one of these alternate means of configuration control may be necessary when the Technical Standard Order test article is installed on an aircraft for the purpose of obtaining certification data in support of an Supplemental Type Certification/Type Certificate project. The applicant’s plan for these requirements should be included in this section. The applicant should also describe a process to maintain configuration control of the test article throughout compliance testing. Test articles may require repair or design changes as a result of qualification testing. The applicant should establish a process to maintain configuration control for all changes or repairs incorporated into the test article. This process should be sufficient to ascertain where credit may be taken for tests already completed and where re-testing is required. 7. Compliance Documentation This section should describe the procedures for submittal and processing of compliance documentation. The Project Specific Certification Plan should identify what data will be submitted and by whom. It should account for all data (not just drawings) pertinent to defining the type design, including manufacturing specifications, and pertinent to conducting the showings of compliance required for Federal Aviation Administration approval. The following list of items should be considered: PSAC (Plan for Software Aspects of Certification) Environmental test reports Technical Standard Order Minimum Operational Performance Standard compliance test reports Software Accomplishment Summary (SAS) Software Configuration Summary Functional Hazard Assessment (FHA)/System Safety Assessment (SSA) at Line Replaceable Unit level Bill of Material Line Replaceable Unit identification tag(s) Operating manual DERs should be utilized to submit data as defined in the Partnership for Safety Plan. DERs submit Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 with data that has been Designated Engineering Representative approved or recommended for approval. Data submitted without an Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 will require Federal Aviation Administration engineering review and approval, which may add to the processing time. This should be taken into account when developing the project schedule. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant will agree and document the amount of time needed for review, disposition, and approval or acceptance of the data, as appropriate. Typically, this may be up to four (4) weeks for designee recommended approval data. Some submittals, due to size or complexity, may require more time. Some examples include: Instructions for Continued Airworthiness and safety analyses. The timing and process for such submittals should be agreed upon between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant and documented in the Project Specific Certification Plan. Data submittals that are designee approved are reviewed only for designee oversight purposes, whereas data that is recommended for approval must be reviewed for those aspects that the designee could not or did not evaluate. Hence, communication and pre-planning for data submittal and consideration of the level of delegation between designees and the Federal Aviation Administration is essential and encouraged to ensure timely efficient data approval. PRODUCTIONAPPROVAL This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should outline production quality project issues and tell how they will be managed to permit early approval of the production system. The goal is to have concurrent design and production approval issuance. The primary focal points for the production approval process are the Federal Aviation Administration Principal Aviation Safety Inspector and the applicant’s Project Quality Manager. Production approval is granted after the applicant has demonstrated, and the Federal Aviation Administration has verified, that the applicant has developed and is capable of maintaining a quality assurance system. This system will ensure that only products and parts conforming to the design data are released for commercial service use. For existing Production Approval Holders (PAH) who will be adding a new product to an existing approved production system, issues to be considered should include the following: Approval of new materials, new processes, new suppliers, co-production agreements, new technologies or new applications of existing technology, etc. Federal Aviation Administration undue burden assessment of either non-US suppliers or co-producers, or both Instructions for assembly and test of the final product to ensure conformance Coordination with engineering on production Material Review Board requirements and integrating engineering and production Certificate Management activities Controls to be placed on production as a result of design Airworthiness Limitations or the criticality of parts and components Configuration control requirements Any other reviews necessary to ensure that a conforming product will be produced under the Federal Aviation Administration approved quality inspection system Applicants who do not hold an existing production approval for the type of product that is being approved under this Project Specific Certification Plan must also demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Federal Aviation Administration, the existence of and compliance with a quality system that satisfies ALL the requirements of the applicable subparts of 14 code of federal regulations Part 21. POST APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS -- COMPLIANCE SUMMARY DOCUMENT The applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will prepare a summary at the end of each approval project to capture and retain the corporate knowledge learned during the project. The summary should capture only unique data, precedent issues (for example, regulatory, policy, or technical), and both the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration perspectives, feedback, and lessons learned. This document is not to be a complete history of the project but should only document those areas out of the ordinary that require process improvements, affect rule/policy making, and so forth, in order to provide continuous improvement of the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant's working relationship. This summary, plus the phase evaluation checklists, should be evaluated by the team and appropriate changes to the Partnership for Safety Plan or future PSCPs should be made. When the team identifies where changes to the guide would be beneficial, those should be referred to Aircraft Certification Service-100 for consideration. PROJECT ISSUE PLANNING The applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will jointly maintain a project issues tracking list. This list, at a minimum, should include issues identified as potential “show-stoppers.” The list will identify the issue, the plan and milestones for their resolution, as well as the primary responsible team member for ensuring the closure of each issue within the operating norms of the project schedule. The PMs will continually manage those issues to ensure adequate progress is being made on their resolution to not adversely affect the project schedule. The PMs will identify to their management and other appropriate team members, concerns and problems with open issues and seek early resolution of any items not proceeding according to the agreed Project Specific Certification Plan. A specific issue resolution process example is shown in the Partnership for Safety Plan. (Appendix I of The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification) The process, as defined in a Partnership for Safety Plan, may be incorporated by reference in the Project Specific Certification Plan, or a specific process could be included here to meet any unique needs of the particular project. CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. General In this section a statement should be made that the continuous improvement processes detailed in the Partnership for Safety Plan will be followed. 2. Phase Evaluation Checklist The Phase Evaluation Checklist (Appendix VII of this guide) is a tool that can be used for project management as the project moves through the five phases. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant PMs should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the beginning of a project. The applicant/Federal Aviation Administration team should continuously evaluate the project for immediate process improvement. For long duration projects, the PMs should complete the “Deliverables” portion of the form at the end of each phase. For projects with a short completion time, the form should be completed at the end. The PMs are encouraged to include the completion of the Phase Evaluation Checklists as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. To facilitate continuous improvement, any necessary corrective actions should be implemented by the team and the Phase Evaluation Checklist should be maintained in the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant’s official project file for future national or local program evaluation. When the evaluation identifies the need for corrective actions or improvements, it should be included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future reference. During initial CPI implementation, an Federal Aviation Administration/Aerospace Industry Association/GAMA Product Certification Continuous Improvement Steering Committee reviews all project evaluation feedback on current projects. The team evaluates project lessons learned and recommends guide changes for continuous improvement. This same process will be used for feedback and continuous improvement for the avionics certification process. A copy of the form should also be sent to the Federal Aviation Administration’s Aircraft Engineering Division, Aircraft Certification Service-100, for Federal Aviation Administration and industry review of the CPI process. SIGNATORIES The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to the provisions of this Project Specific Certification Plan as indicated by the signature of their duly authorized representatives. Agreed by: (This is a representative sample of possible signatories and could include others deemed appropriate to provide necessary commitments and accountability. Include Names and date) Applicant Certification Manager Applicant Project Manager Applicant Project Quality Manager Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Office Manager Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager Federal Aviation Administration manufacturing Inspection District Office Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Engineering Avionics Systems Manager Federal Aviation Administration Principal Inspector Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation GroupInspector(s) APPENDIX VI PROJECT SPECIFIC CERTIFICATION PLAN For Installation or Avionics Approval Through the Supplemental Type Certification Process between the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION and APPLICANT (Specify Name) for (List specific product here) The material contained herein is an airport information desk for preparing the Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP) for installation of avionics approved through the Technical Standard Order (TSO) process or items in which a Technical Standard Order does not exist. This airport information desk is intentionally not a “boilerplate,” but allows the freedom to innovate and meet the special project needs of the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration. However, it is essential that the Project Specific Certification Plan addresses the same key content areas of this airport information desk ensuring that, as written, it captures the meaning and intent of this guide. The Project Specific Certification Plan should include elements that were not addressed in detail in the Partnership for Safety Plan and it should incorporate by reference appropriate procedures, agreements, or other elements pertinent to the project. TABLE OF CONTENTS PURPOSE EFFECTIVITY PRODUCT APPROVAL 1. Project Description 2. System Description 3. Project Schedule 4. Certification Approach a. System Safety Assessment b. Certification Basis and Means of compliance c. Software d. Human Factors e. Other (Operational Concept, Equipment Compatibility, Envisioned Safety Enhancements) 5. Communication and Responsibilities a. Communication b. Roles and Responsibilities 6. Delegation 7. Testing Plan a. General b. Flight Test/Human Factors Evaluations c. Environmental Testing d. Conformity 8. Compliance Documentation PRODUCTION CERTIFICATION POST CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 1. Compliance Summary Document 2. Instructions for Continued Airworthiness (ICA) 3. Continued Airworthiness Management CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. General 2. Phase Evaluation Checklist SIGNATORIES PURPOSE The purpose of this Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP) is to define and document a product approval plan between the Aircraft Certification Service of the Federal Aviation Administration (Federal Aviation Administration) and the applicant. The plan should expedite the issuance of a Supplemental Type Certificate (Supplemental Type Certification) for the fabrication or installation, or both, for the applicant’s (specify Line Replaceable Unit or system) under standardized procedures. The applicant is (specify applicants name). If a Technical Standard Order Authorization is being worked as a parallel project, it should be stated as follows: As a parallel certification project, the Technical Standard Order Authorization will be covered by a stand-alone Project Specific Certification Plan. This Project Specific Certification Plan will provide the foundation from which to build mutual trust, teamwork, and efficient business practices between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant during approval of the product. It is the mutual goal of all team members to meet or exceed the expectations of this agreement. It is understood that this Project Specific Certification Plan will be executed in accordance with the Partnership for Safety Plan. However there are certain situations where a Partnership for Safety Plan is not warranted. In these situations, those applicable sections for a Partnership for Safety Plan must be incorporated into this Project Specific Certification Plan. (Only use the following sentence if a Partnership for Safety Plan has not been developed:) There is no current Partnership for Safety Plan with (specify applicant), but specific sections have to be added in this Project Specific Certification Plan that include the CPI principles contained in a stand-alone Partnership for Safety Plan. In the establishment of this Project Specific Certification Plan, it is understood that a cooperative working relationship is required for these procedures to be effective. To implement successfully the Project Specific Certification Plan procedures, it is understood that both the applicant and Federal Aviation Administration team members work in accordance with the established guidelines. The Federal Aviation Administration team members will recognize and utilize the knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration designees to the greatest extent possible and keep the applicant’s team members abreast of certification issues that may arise. The Project Specific Certification Plan schedule will be within specified ranges agreed to in the norms of the Partnership for Safety Plan and additional milestones will be considered by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant as firm commitments unless they agree to a change. It is intended that all team members facilitate review and approval of the necessary design and production data and related compliance documents in a timely manner with the objective of bettering the Project Specific Certification Plan wherever possible. The Project Specific Certification Plan is a living document. This means that if both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree that modification to the Plan is needed, an amended Plan is drafted. The Plan will be developed to the greatest extent possible as soon as the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree that the certification project is a viable one for which resources can be planned and committed for its completion. As the project progresses, the Project Specific Certification Plan will be managed and maintained jointly by the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s Project Managers. EFFECTIVITY This Project Specific Certification Plan shall become effective upon approval by the Managers of the (specify name of Aircraft Certification Office) Aircraft Certification Office, the appropriate Standards Office (Directorate or Aircraft Engineering Division), the (specify name of manufacturing Inspection District Office) Manufacturing Inspection District Office, the (specify name ofAEG) Aircraft Evaluation Group, and the applicant’s Certification or Airworthiness Manager. This Project Specific Certification Plan may be amended by mutual agreement or terminated by either the applicant or the Federal Aviation Administration. This Project Specific Certification Plan will continue in effect throughout all Phases of the product approval unless it is superseded, revised, or terminated with written notice by either the applicant or the Federal Aviation Administration. Any change in the services furnished or other provisions of this Project Specific Certification Plan will be formalized by an appropriate written amendment signed by effected parties, which will outline the nature of the change. PRODUCT APPROVAL 1. Project Description This section should contain a brief description of the project. This section should also include a brief description of the type of approval requested and a brief discussion of the equipment's intended function. 2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION This section should contain a comprehensive system description. This system description should provide enough detail about the avionics system such that the certification team can evaluate the Project Specific Certification Plan to determine if all the issues are addressed in the Project Specific Certification Plan. Any unique design issues should be detailed in this section. A brief summary of the product as it relates to existing flight deck displays, sensors, added sensors, switches, annunciator lights, control panels, electrical components, interior arrangement, other interfaces, and so forth, should be included. A description of the installation of the product should also be contained in this section. 3. Project Schedule A detailed project schedule should be provided as an appendix to the Project Specific Certification Plan and it should identify all major milestones, including appropriate project management reviews and any required scheduled deliverables such as those listed below. (Being in an appendix will facilitate schedule changes without having to revise the Project Specific Certification Plan.) If required, these milestones need to be established in accordance with the operating norms identified in the Partnership for Safety Plan. Every effort must be made to establish realistic schedules considering both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s total workloads and other resource commitments. Design, production, operational, and maintenance aspects as well as foreign authority validation requirements should be planned for and considered. All issue papers, if applicable, should also be included with a resolution plan and prioritization of the issues to be resolved. The schedule should adhere to the Phases and process flow identified in The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification. This would include identifying in the schedule all appropriate deliverables for the project such as, but not limited to, those shown below: Deliverables: Familiarization and technical meeting(s) minutes Supplemental Type Certification Application Project Acknowledgment Certification Project Notification (CPN) Draft and final Project Specific Certification Plan Compliance data submittals (e.g., test plans/reports, analyses.) Statement of Conformance and Conformity Inspections Supplemental Type Certificate Issued Quality Control Procedures and documentation Production approvals parts manufacturer approval Issued Phase Evaluation Checklist 4. Certification Approach The certification approach should be outlined in the Project Specific Certification Plan. If the applicant chooses to use the generic Supplemental Type Certification process for installation of the avionics system, the approach should be outlined in this section. The generic Supplemental Type Certification aircraft model list should be identified in this section. a. System Safety Assessment The criticality of the avionics system should be identified. A system safety assessment should be performed that establishes the hazards associated with the proposed installation. Based on the System Safety Assessment (SSA), the classification of the failure condition(s) should be stated. b. Certification Basis and Means of Compliance The Certification Basis identifies the applicable standards to which the applicant must show compliance. It also includes the need for special conditions, exemptions, and equivalent safety findings, if any. A certification matrix should be included that identifies the applicable regulations, ACs, current policies, and the procedures or methods that will be used to comply with the regulations. The certification matrix should also identify the type of documentation that will be used to show compliance. Any testing or analyses applicable to the project that has been previously approved by the Federal Aviation Administration should be identified in this section. When identifying those approvals, the approval date, letter reference number, and reference as to how the specific approval was granted (Supplemental Type Certification, Technical Standard Order Authorization, Design Approval, etc.) should be referenced. c. Software A brief discussion of the software certification approach should be outlined in the Project Specific Certification Plan. This discussion should address software criticality. Any unique design features (Commercial Off the Shelf (COTS), Windows NTTM, etc.) should also be addressed and the approach used to certify the software. d. Human Factors A human factors plan should be outlined in the Project Specific Certification Plan. This outline may be brief or extensive, depending on the complexity of the equipment. For new types of avionics or applications, the human factors plan should be comprehensive. For guidance on developing a human factors plan, refer to GAMA Publication 10, Recommended Practices and Guidelines for Part 23 Cockpit/Flight Deck Design. e. Other (Operational Concept, Equipment Compatibility, Envisioned Safety Enhancements) It may be useful in developing the certification approach to provide a brief discussion of some of the above topics. These discussions should provide enough detail to support the certification approach. For well-established types of avionics systems, addressing these additional topics would not be necessary. 5. Communication and Responsibilities a. Communication This section describes the communication responsibilities of the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s certification teams and, where appropriate, co-producers, suppliers, other Civil Aviation Authorities, and so forth. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant establish the appropriate communication and coordination paths by identifying the respective team members. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant’s PMs must be kept informed of all critical communications. Critical links should be defined to ensure that roles and responsibilities are clear to define accountable team members responsible for deliverables and to facilitate conflict resolution. This does not preclude any team member from communicating with any other member, but they need to ensure the PMs are informed. Team members typically will communicate with the PMs via email and telephone. b. Roles and Responsibilities This section describes the roles and responsibilities of the applicant and Federal Aviation Administration team members. Table 1is a sample of the typical table to show the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant team members and their roles and responsibilities. Please note that your program may require team members with different roles and responsibilities than those listed in the sample shown in Table 1. 6. Delegation The oversight and documentation requirements of engineers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, and flight test pilot designees’ requirements should be identified and agreed to in this section. This should also include reliance on existing delegation authorization agreements or working procedures generated between the Federal Aviation Administration, the applicant, and other authorities, as appropriate, that should already be specified in the Partnership for Safety Plan. The Project Specific Certification Plan should be specific as to what aspects of the project are delegated and what, if any, stipulations, coordination, or limitations are placed upon that delegation. Delegation should be applied to the maximum extent practicable with appropriate safeguards and oversight as defined in Appendix VIII, the Federal Aviation Administration's delegation management process policy, and this Project Specific Certification Plan. Because of the close integration of the design, production, and continued airworthiness processes, it is necessary to have all stakeholders agree on the procedures and degree of delegation and oversight to be used in the project. To facilitate certification, the Federal Aviation Administration designee system will be utilized to the greatest extent possible. Both the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to foster an environment where open communication between the designees and company management and between the designees and their Federal Aviation Administration counterparts is standard practice. The applicant agrees to create a working environment where designees can make compliance and conformity findings free from undue pressure and with the support and knowledge of the Federal Aviation Administration. It is understood that the Federal Aviation Administration’s objective is to find compliance and conformity with the regulations and not to dictate design. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to manage all designee activity within the regulations and policy regarding designee appointment, procedures, and oversight. 7. TESTING PLAN a. General This section should contain the requirements for the planning, preparation, and conduct of Federal Aviation Administration required testing. The applicant’s product development tests do not require Federal Aviation Administration involvement. However, Federal Aviation Administration certification credit will not be granted for development tests unless arrangements are made and agreed upon prior to testing. These pretest arrangements must be coordinated with appropriate Federal Aviation Administration engineers, flight test pilots, and Aviation Safety Inspectors with sufficient lead-time to ensure all aspects necessary for the desired Federal Aviation Administration credit toward certification are achieved. This is particularly important for critical parts and components or when new technology, new materials or new processes are involved, which should necessitate a greater depth of review and conformity inspection. Federal Aviation Administration personnel will witness all ground and flight tests intended for certification credit that are not specifically delegated to designees prior to testing. Delegation should be used wherever possible. Who will witness which tests should be planned for and documented in advance in the delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan and the compliance checklist. When the Federal Aviation Administration does witness, they will meet the project schedule as agreed upon to the greatest extent possible. The applicant should keep the Federal Aviation Administration informed of test schedules, and changes should be negotiated with affected team members. The following items are required prior to testing: Drawings and specifications that sufficiently describe the design and production of the test article; Federal Aviation Administration approved test plan, including either a description or drawing, or both, of the test set-up, instrumentation, calibration requirements, etc.; The applicant’s completed inspections and Statement of Conformity, Federal Aviation Administration Form 8130-9; Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10, Conformity Request; and Federal Aviation Administration Form 8100-1, Conformity Report, indicating the results of the Conformity Inspection, including disposition of deviations by Federal Aviation Administration engineering or their designee if so delegated. (A copy must be available for the official test witnessing.) When specifically delegated as identified in the delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan, designees can submit fully approved test plans with Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 and Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10 requests for conformity inspection, where needed, and disposition conformity deviations. All instrumentation that is required for an Federal Aviation Administration certification test will require calibration criteria to be agreed upon with the accountable Federal Aviation Administration engineering team members or their designee, if so delegated, and to be documented in each test plan or in a generic calibration procedures document as appropriate. b. Flight Test/Human Factors Evaluations This section should contain any unique requirements for the planning, preparation, and conduct of Federal Aviation Administration required flight testing. Flight tests are conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Type Inspection Authorization (TIA). The Type Inspection Authorization also authorizes conformity and airworthiness inspections and flight tests to determine compliance with the certification requirements. It is important to ensure close pre-flight test coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, including Federal Aviation Administration discipline managers, Aviation Safety Inspectors, and the flight test pilots, in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration policy. The Project Specific Certification Plan will provide the clarity to: Conduct conformity inspections early in the project. Ensure timely, high-quality documentation. Complete pertinent applicant flight tests and report results prior to Federal Aviation Administration flight test. Coordinate within the Federal Aviation Administration for concurrent Product Certification and Aircraft Evaluation Groupflight testing. Ensure aircraft conformity, airworthiness certification, and identify operating limitations. Detail scheduling. Specify use of delegation. Consider flight test risk management in conjunction with the entire team. c. Environmental Testing Environmental tests should be specified in the Project Specific Certification Plan. The test requirements, as they are identified in radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-160, should be specified. d. Conformity 14 code of federal regulations Part 21, §§ 21.33 and 21.53, require the applicant to make all inspections necessary to establish the conformity of the product being presented to the Administrator for certification and to submit a Statement of Conformity to the Federal Aviation Administration on Federal Aviation Administration Form 8130-9. The Federal Aviation Administration will then determine, as far in advance as possible, which Statements of Conformity it will accept without verification and which will require Federal Aviation Administration conformity inspections. Some factors affecting this would be the criticality of the part/component, whether there is either new material, a new process, or technology involved, or whether there is an existing quality control or inspection system that has demonstrated its ability to adequately ensure conformity, or all of these. This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should describe what conformities will be needed, and the Federal Aviation Administration’s and the applicant’s roles in the conformity inspection process for the project. This should be consistent with the delegation section of the Project Specific Certification Plan. It should state which conformity inspections will be conducted, which will be delegated to designees, and how deviations will be dispositioned. A system should be established to: Maintain custody of conformed articles destined for an official Federal Aviation Administration test. Notify Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspector of any changes to ground/flight test articles after conformity inspection has been completed. Ensure requests are not duplicated and that the timely and efficient conduct of conformities and dispositioning of deviations occur. Identify who issues the requests, conducts the inspections, and dispositions the deviations. Provide for the completion of inspection, documentation, and dispositioning of deviations or changes before tests are conducted. Provide for timely conduct of conformity inspection at non-US suppliers. Conformity inspections will be performed by Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspectors or their designees. These inspections will be performed in response to Federal Aviation Administration Form 8120-10 (request for conformity) issued by the Federal Aviation Administration or their designees. The applicant, Federal Aviation Administration engineer, and Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspector, along with their respective designees, will agree upon and document a plan by which the designees from all disciplines can work directly together to perform conformity. 8. Compliance Documentation This section should describe the procedures for submittal and processing of compliance documentation. The Project Specific Certification Plan should identify what data will be submitted and by whom. It should account for all data (not just drawings) pertinent to defining the type design, including manufacturing specifications, and to conducting the showings of compliance required for Federal Aviation Administration certification. This would include, but is not limited to, test plans, test reports, test setup schematics, test instrumentation, drawings, analyses (for example, stress, safety, damage tolerance), material or process specifications, manuals. The applicant will submit one copy of the data with each Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 (original and copy). Data submitted without an Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-3 will require Federal Aviation Administration engineering review and approval, which may add to the processing time. This should be taken into account when developing the project schedule. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant will agree and document the amount of time needed for review, disposition, and approval or acceptance of the data, as appropriate. Typically, this may be up to four (4) weeks for designee recommended approval data. Some submittals, due to size or complexity, may require more time. Some examples include Instructions for Continued Airworthiness and safety analyses. The timing and process for such submittals should be agreed upon between the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant and documented in the Project Specific Certification Plan. Data submittals that are designee approved are reviewed only for designee oversight purposes, whereas data that is recommended for approval must be reviewed for those aspects that the designee could not or did not evaluate. Hence, communication and pre-planning for data submittal and consideration of the level of delegation between designees and the Federal Aviation Administration is essential and encouraged to ensure timely efficient data approval. PRODUCTION CERTIFICATION This section of the Project Specific Certification Plan should outline production quality project issues and tell how they will be managed to permit early approval of the production system. The goal is to have concurrent design and production approval issuance. The primary focal points for the production approval process are the Federal Aviation Administration Principal Aviation Safety Inspector and the applicant’s Project Quality Manager. Production approval is granted after the applicant has demonstrated, and the Federal Aviation Administration has verified, that the applicant has developed and is capable of maintaining a quality assurance system. This system will ensure that only products and parts conforming to the design data are released for commercial service use. For existing Production Approval Holders (PAH) who will be adding a new product to an existing approved production system, issues to be considered should include the following: Approval of new materials, new processes, new suppliers, co-production agreements, new technologies or new applications of existing technology, etc. Federal Aviation Administration undue burden assessment of either non-US suppliers or co-producers or both Instructions for assembly and test of the final product to ensure conformance Coordination with engineering on production Material Review Board requirements and integrating engineering and production Certificate Management activities Controls to be placed on production as a result of design Airworthiness Limitations or the criticality of parts and components Configuration control requirements Any other reviews necessary to ensure that a conforming product will be produced under the Federal Aviation Administration approved quality inspection system Applicants who do not hold an existing production approval for the type of product that is being certificated under this Project Specific Certification Plan must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Federal Aviation Administration, the existence of and compliance with a quality system that satisfies ALL the requirements of the applicable subparts of 14 code of federal regulations Part 21. POST CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 1. Compliance Summary Document The applicant and Federal Aviation Administration PMs will prepare a summary at the end of each certification project to capture and retain the corporate knowledge learned during the project. The summary should capture only unique data, precedent issues (for example, regulatory, policy, or technical), and both the applicant and Federal Aviation Administration perspectives, feedback, and lessons learned. This document is not to be a complete history of the project but should only document those areas out of the ordinary that require process improvements, affect rule/policy making, and so forth, in order to provide continuous improvement of the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant's working relationship. The team should evaluate this summary, plus the phase evaluation checklists, and appropriate changes to the Partnership for Safety Plan or future PSCPs should be made. When the team identifies where changes to the guide would be beneficial, those should be referred to Aircraft Certification Service-100 for consideration. 2. Instructions for Continued Airworthiness (ICA) The process used to ensure Continued Airworthiness should be outlined in this section. 3. Continued Airworthiness Management The details of how the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant will handle continued airworthiness issues will be agreed upon and documented. This will be consistent with the 14 code of federal regulations and Federal Aviation Administration policy on certificate management, reporting, self-disclosure and the requirements for implementing corrective actions in both the type design and production systems. CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT 1. General In this section, a statement should be made that the continuous improvement processes detailed in the Partnership for Safety Plan will be followed. 2. Phase Evaluation Checklist The Phase Evaluation Checklist (Appendix VII of this guide) is a tool that can be used for project management as the project moves through the five phases. The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant PMs should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the beginning of a project. The applicant/Federal Aviation Administration team should continuously evaluate the project for immediate process improvement. For long duration projects, the PMs should complete the “Deliverables” portion of the form at the end of each phase. For projects with a short completion time, the form should be completed at the end. The PMs are encouraged to include the completion of the Phase Evaluation Checklists as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. To facilitate continuous improvement, any necessary corrective actions should be implemented by the team and the Phase Evaluation Checklist should be maintained in the Federal Aviation Administration and applicant’s official project file for future national or local program evaluation. When the evaluation identifies the need for corrective actions or improvements, it should be included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future reference. During initial Certification Process Improvement implementation, an Federal Aviation Administration/Aerospace Industry Association/GAMA Product Certification Continuous Improvement Steering Committee reviews all project evaluation feedback on current projects. The team evaluates project lessons learned and recommends guide changes for continuous improvement. This same process will be used for feedback and continuous improvement for the avionics certification process. A copy of the form should also be sent to the Federal Aviation Administration’s Aircraft Engineering Division, Aircraft Certification Service-100, for Federal Aviation Administration and industry review of the Certification Process Improvement process. SIGNATORIES The Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant agree to the provisions of this Project Specific Certification Plan as indicated by the signature of their duly authorized representatives. Agreed by: (This is a representative sample of possible signatories and could include others deemed appropriate to provide necessary commitments and accountability. Include Names and date) Applicant Certification Manager Applicant Project Manager Applicant Project Quality Manager Federal Aviation Administration Designee(s) Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Manager Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Evaluation GroupInspector(s) Federal Aviation Administration Aircraft Certification Office Manager Federal Aviation Administration Project Manager Federal Aviation Administration manufacturing Inspection District Office Manager(s) Federal Aviation Administration Principal Inspector Federal Aviation Administration Standards Staff Project Officer APPENDIX VII Phase Evaluation Checklists The Phase Evaluation Checklists are a tool used for project evaluation during the appropriate Phases. The Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Project Managers (PMs) should jointly prepare a Phase Evaluation Checklist at the close of each Phase of a Product Certification. These forms should be continuously evaluated by the Applicant/Federal Aviation Administration team for immediate process improvement. The PMs are encouraged to include the completion of the Phase Evaluation Checklists as milestones when preparing their Project Specific Certification Plan schedule. During initial implementation of this Guide, a Federal Aviation Administration/Aerospace Industry Association/GAMA Product Certification Continuous Improvement Steering Committee reviewed the Phase Evaluation Checklist feedback from certain initial projects and recommended Guide changes for continuous improvement. To facilitate continuous improvement, the Phase Evaluation Checklists should be maintained in the official project file and included as a part of the Compliance Summary Document for future national or local program evaluation. PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLIST PHASE I: CONCEPTUAL DESIGN Project Name: _________________________________________ Federal Aviation Administration Project Number: _________________ Project Managers: Names: Applicant: _____________ Federal Aviation Administration: _______________ Company: _____________ Office: _______________ Were the following Deliverables completed? (check where applicable): Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Preliminary certification basis considering the intended means of compliance, initial safety assessments, and relevant policy material and begin formulation of Project Specific Certification Plan Definition and plan for resolution of critical issues such as new designs, technology or processes; potential special conditions, exemptions or equivalent safety findings; co-production or foreign supplier arrangements requiring undue burden assessments; etc. as appropriate Identify core team for commitment to developing the preliminary Partnership for Safety Plan elements to ensure continuity Answer the following questions appropriate to this Phase (attach separate sheets as needed): Ph1 Questions n/a 1 Were the Project Specific Certification Plan milestones based on the norms? n/a If not within the norms, Why? n/a 2 Were the milestones periodically validated and mutually readjusted by the Project Specific Certification Plan signatories throughout the program as needed? n/a 3 Were the final milestones met? n/a 4 Was the delegation plan followed? n/a What worked well? n/a What didn’t work well? x 5 Was the Issue Resolution Process established/applied as needed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 6 Changes required for next Phase? x If yes, explain action needed. PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLIST PHASE II: REQUIREMENTS DEFINITION Project Name: ________________________________________ Federal Aviation Administration Project Number: _________________ Project Managers: Names: Applicant: _____________ Federal Aviation Administration: _______________ Company: _____________ Office: _______________ Were the following Deliverables completed? (check where applicable): Submission of Application, Federal Aviation Administration Form 8110-12 (Federal Aviation Administration Order 8110.4) Acknowledgment of Application Certification Project Notification (Federal Aviation Administration Order 8110.4) and Establishment of Project Establishment of Federal Aviation Administration and Applicant Certification Team Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Preliminary Project Specific Certification Plan including project milestones and related events such as program status reviews (See Appendix II) Agreement of Type Certificate Certification Basis plan and definition of project issues such as means of compliance including special conditions, equivalent safety findings, exemptions, etc. Answer the following questions appropriate to this Phase (attach separate sheets as needed): Ph2 Questions x 1 Were the Project Specific Certification Plan milestones based on the norms? x If not within the norms, Why? x 2 Were the milestones periodically validated and mutually readjusted by the Project Specific Certification Plan signatories throughout the program as needed? x 3 Were the final milestones met? n/a 4 Was the delegation plan followed? n/a What worked well? n/a What didn’t work well? x 5 Was the Issue Resolution Process established/applied as needed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 6 Changes required for next Phase? x If yes, explain action needed. PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLIST PHASE III: COMPLIANCE PLANNING Project Name: ______________________________________ Federal Aviation Administration Project Number: _________________ Project Managers: Names: Applicant: _____________ Federal Aviation Administration: _______________ Company: _____________ Office: _______________ Were the following Deliverables completed? (check where applicable): Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Signed Project Specific Certification Plan (See Appendix II in this Guide) Project schedule with established Federal Aviation Administration/Applicant milestones for completion of analyses, test plan submission, Type Inspection Authorization, conformities, flight test, Aircraft Evaluation Groupevaluations, critical issues resolution plan, and other items affecting the completion of the project Agreed Type Certification Basis Compliance Checklist Completion of Stage 1 on all issue papers Identification of stakeholders, including suppliers, installers in the case of engines, propellers, or systems, etc. Delegations defined with oversight criteria Resource Requirements Conformity Procedures Project evaluation measures Answer the following questions appropriate to this Phase (attach separate sheets as needed): Ph3 Questions x 1 Were the Project Specific Certification Plan milestones based on the norms? x If not within the norms, Why? x 2 Were the milestones periodically validated and mutually readjusted by the Project Specific Certification Plan signatories throughout the program as needed? x 3 Were the final milestones met? N/a 4 Was the delegation plan followed? N/a What worked well? N/a What didn’t work well? x 5 Was the Issue Resolution Process established/applied as needed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 6 Changes required for next Phase? x If yes, explain action needed. PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLIST PHASE IV: IMPLEMENTATION Project Name: _____________________________________ Federal Aviation Administration Project Number: _________________ Project Managers: Names: Applicant: _____________ Federal Aviation Administration: _______________ Company: _____________ Office: _______________ Were the following Deliverables completed? (check where applicable): Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, and action item assignments Meet milestones for completion of analyses, test plan submission, Type Inspection Authorization, conformities, flight test, Aircraft Evaluation Groupevaluations, critical issues resolution plan, and other items affecting the completion of the project Completed test plans/reports, conformity requests, inspections, and compliance documentation Issue Papers, Special Conditions, Exemptions, Equivalent Safety Findings Compliance and conformance findings Type Design and Production approval issuance Answer the following questions appropriate to this Phase (attach separate sheets as needed): Ph4 Questions x 1 Were the Project Specific Certification Plan milestones based on the norms? x If not within the norms, Why? x 2 Were the milestones periodically validated and mutually readjusted by the Project Specific Certification Plan signatories throughout the program as needed? x 3 Were the final milestones met? x 4 Was the delegation plan followed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 5 Was the Issue Resolution Process established/applied as needed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 6 Changes required for next Phase? x If yes, explain action needed. PHASE EVALUATION CHECKLIST PHASE V: POST CERTIFICATION Project Name: ___________________________________________ Federal Aviation Administration Project Number: _________________ Project Managers: Names: Applicant: _____________ Federal Aviation Administration: _______________ Company: _____________ Office: _______________ Were the following Deliverables completed? (check where applicable): Meeting minutes and correspondence to document decisions, agreements, schedules, milestones, and action item assignments Compliance Summary Document Type Inspection Report Instructions for Continued Airworthiness Continued Airworthiness Management Plan Answer the following questions appropriate to this Phase (attach separate sheets as needed): Ph5 Questions x 1 Were the Project Specific Certification Plan milestones based on the norms? x If not within the norms, Why? x 2 Were the milestones periodically validated and mutually readjusted by the Project Specific Certification Plan signatories throughout the program as needed? x 3 Were the final milestones met? x 4 Was the delegation plan followed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 5 Was the Issue Resolution Process established/applied as needed? x What worked well? x What didn’t work well? x 6 Changes required for next Phase? x If yes, explain action needed. APPENDIX VIII DELEGATION PLANNING This Appendix on Delegation Planning was developed to assist both the industry and the Federal Aviation Administration in making better delegation decisions. The delegation decisions called for by the Project Specific Certification Plan should be integrated with other planning data in the project’s compliance checklist. Each finding in the certification basis should be evaluated for delegation. This guide provides a compliance checklist template that serves as a tool to assist with delegation planning. Introduction The Federal Aviation Administration and Industry Guide to Product Certification (CPI Guide), dated January 25, 1999, describes certification process improvements based on up-front project planning, project management, and documenting the certification process, which will allow delegation to be used to the maximum extent practicable. This addendum to the Certification Process Improvement Guide will address risk assessment and risk management in the project management process and define how delegation decisions should be made. This will permit the maximum use of delegation, and allow Federal Aviation Administration employees to focus in critical areas. Delegation at this level will require the utmost in mutual trust, leadership, and teamwork between the Federal Aviation Administration and applicants. Project Planning Goals The tools of Certification Process Improvement are the building blocks that allow the Federal Aviation Administration to maximize the use of delegation on a project. By developing the partnership for safety plan and through the use of project specific certification plans the Federal Aviation Administration can document delegation decisions that clearly define the responsibilities of the applicant and their designees. These project management decisions should be made using criteria based in the value of direct Federal Aviation Administration employee involvement. When a particular decision or event is critical to the success of the project or the safety of the product, the Federal Aviation Administration employees should be directly involved. However, Federal Aviation Administration trust in the applicant's designees should allow the norm to be full delegation in areas that do not benefit from direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement. In order to apply risk management to these project decisions, Federal Aviation Administration project managers must involve project team members and use their experience to identify critical issues. Critical safety findings must be identified based on the safety impact or the complexity of the requirement or the method of compliance. Additional factors to consider in determining the areas of direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement include the Federal Aviation Administration's confidence in the applicant, the applicant's experience, the applicant's internal processes, and trust in the applicant's designees. Making Delegation Decisions Based on Value of Federal Aviation Administration Involvement Once the project team has determined the findings that require direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement all others should be considered acceptable for delegation. Once a finding is delegated, any increase in direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement in that finding should be determined based on the value of that involvement. Keep in mind that the value of direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement decreases when appropriate trust and designee capability exists to make the finding. However, when confidence in the designee is lacking or the designee is inexperienced, then value of direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement increases. There will also be less tangible reasons for direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement in a delegated finding including involvement that is the result of project oversight or Designated Engineering Representative oversight, or for the purpose of developing Federal Aviation Administration team-member experience. This type of Federal Aviation Administration involvement should be planned so that is does not adversely impact the project schedule. It is also possible that Federal Aviation Administration involvement will need to be increased if unsatisfactory Designated Engineering Representative performance is experienced previously in the project. Internal Federal Aviation Administration Oversight Considerations Federal Aviation Administration Designated Engineering Representative managers should plan for levels of individual designee oversight they will perform based on the value of the their review and the risk of not reviewing the delegated finding. For the purpose of estimating the amount of direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement the Designated Engineering Representative managers should classify findings into the following three categories: (a) Findings that will need no further Aircraft Certification Office review – The Federal Aviation Administration is confident that the applicant’s designees are solely responsible for the scheduling and making of the finding. The Federal Aviation Administration will accept the finding without additional involvement or impact to the project schedule. Findings in this category require no direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement. (b) Findings that will benefit from Aircraft Certification Office review –Although the applicant’s designees will be delegated to make these findings the Federal Aviation Administration may review the findings for the purpose of project oversight or Designated Engineering Representative oversight. The Federal Aviation Administration will have discretion to identify what to review and the amount of review necessary. Federal Aviation Administration review can vary from cursory review of the Designated Engineering Representative’s submittal to complete evaluation of the Designated Engineering Representative’s methods.Deficiencies identified during review should be addressed with the Designated Engineering Representative or applicant as appropriate. Findings in this category require judicious use of the available Federal Aviation Administration resources in order to effectively manage the project and DERs. (c) Findings that will require Federal Aviation Administration involvement –Although the applicant’s designees may be involved by recommending approval of data, the Federal Aviation Administration is responsible for making these findings. These findings should be related to key areas reserved for the Federal Aviation Administration, derive significant value from direct Federal Aviation Administration involvement, or result in unacceptable risk if the Aircraft Certification Office is not involved. Findings in this category result in a commitment of Aircraft Certification Office resources to support the agreed-to-project schedule. NOTE: Although the applicant needs to be informed of which findings are reserved for the Federal Aviation Administration, the review/non-review of delegated findings is a matter of internal Aircraft Certification Office resource planning, and should not be communicated to the applicant or designees. Items planned to be accepted without review may change status and require review due to applicant/designee performance during the project, for example, when deficiencies are identified in other findings. By requiring team members to identify the specific areas that they will be involved in, the project manager will be able to better manage the direct Federal Aviation Administration resources and commitment to the project schedule. External Coordination Tools: A Delegation Plan should be an integral part of each Project Specific Certification Plan’s compliance checklist. Each required finding in the certification basis should be evaluated for delegation eligibility. When a delegation decision is made the plan should be updated to define the “who, what, when, how, and where” of each delegated finding. For each delegated finding the designees should be defined by name, the method of compliance specified and agreed to, the schedule and location of the finding established, and the extent of Federal Aviation Administration involvement specified as described in the categories above. As these details are established and agreed to, the project team should commit to the schedule and level of involvement. This will allow increased confidence in the project schedule. However, if the applicant causes changes in agreed to details such as schedule slippage or substitution of designees, or if the Federal Aviation Administration observes designee performance problems, the previously agreed-to delegation decisions are subject to review and change by the Federal Aviation Administration. The Compliance Checklist Template may be tailored to each individual project but should as a minimum include: The regulatory requirement, A summary of the method of compliance, The level of delegation and of Federal Aviation Administration review, The schedule and location of the finding, and The designee authorized to make the finding, by name and number. The Criticality column will be used in the future to capture the relative value of Federal Aviation Administration involvement or risk of not being involved. It will be based on Risk Management techniques being developed to meet the Aircraft Certification Service Strategic Plan. Summary Industry demand for product certification relative to the limited Federal Aviation Administration resources available to perform such services requires more efficient project management and maximum use of delegation with appropriate oversight. Risk management must be applied in the project planning stages to determine where Federal Aviation Administration involvement has the most value. The Federal Aviation Administration project team must then commit to delegation decisions and schedules and allow the applicant’s designees to perform their responsibilities on behalf of the Federal Aviation Administration. Any increase in Federal Aviation Administration involvement should be based on applicant performance or reevaluation of the risk of the Federal Aviation Administration not being involved. The goal of the Federal Aviation Administration when working with Certification Process Improvement partners should be to achieve a level of trust that allows for project management and delegation decisions to be made early in the project planning stages. The expectation that follows is that the Federal Aviation Administration and the applicant will then adhere to their commitments, decisions, and schedules. GLOSSARY Applicant: An individual or organization seeking Federal Aviation Administration approval of a specific aircraft component or installation. The approval may be a Technical Standard Order authorization (TSOA), Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA) or Supplement Type Certificate (STC). Approval: The Federal Aviation Administration issues approvals that include certifications, authorizations, and other forms of approval. Approval may be a Technical Standard Order Authorization (TSOA), Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA), Type Certificate (TC), or Supplemental Type Certificate (STC), as applicable. The Federal Aviation Administration may issue an approval only after determining that all applicable requirements have been met. Certification: A form of Federal Aviation Administration approval where a certificate is issued, such as Type Certificate, Supplemental Type Certification, Production Certificate, or Airworthiness Certificate. Certification Basis: The applicable airworthiness, aircraft noise, fuel venting and exhaust requirements of 14 code of federal regulations §§ 21.17, 21.101, and 21.115, as appropriate; special conditions; and equivalent level of safety; to which the Applicant must show compliance, or not show compliance when granted an exemption. Criteria for Success: Attributes that are expected in the successful completion of each Phase. Deliverables: Items to be produced during any particular Phase of the Product Certification Process by either the Federal Aviation Administration, Designees, or the Applicant. Designee: For the purposes of this Guide, Designee includes individual and organizational delegations. Federal Aviation Administration Form 337: Used to record major repairs or alterations to an airframe, powerplant, propeller or appliance. The form should be completed in accordance with 14 code of federal regulations § 43.9; 14 code of federal regulations part 43, Appendix B; and Advisory Circular 43.9-1(), Instructions for Completing Form 337. First-of-Type Supplemental Type Certification: An initial Supplemental Type Certificate (major design change) issued for a particular make and model of aircraft. Follow-on Supplemental Type Certification: A Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) subsequent to the first-of-type Supplemental Type Certification, issued for a similar make and model of type certificated aircraft. Installation Approval: Installation Approval is described in 14 code of federal regulations § 43.5 and requires the following three specific criteria to be met: 1. A maintenance record is accomplished; 2. A Major Repair and Alteration form (Federal Aviation Administration form 337) has been properly executed; and, 3. If the alteration results in any change in the aircraft operating limitations or flight data contained in the approved Aircraft Flight Manual (AFM), then appropriate revisions will be required. Intended Function: The defined characteristic(s) that equipment must demonstrate and achieve to meet the specific requirements. Key Players: Accountable Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Aviation Administration Designees, and Applicant personnel required for successful completion of any particular Phase of the Product Certification Process. Operational Approval: Operational Approval is a 5-step process used by Flight Standards to authorize an operator to conduct operations using a specific aircraft and associated equipment in a specific operating environment. See Federal Aviation Administration Order 8400.10. Partnership for Safety Plan (Partnership for Safety Plan): The high level standing Plan of how the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant will work and interact together. It sets the expectations and needs of both parties for the relationship. It is not a legally binding agreement but a mutual statement of the intent of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant to hold their respective personnel accountable for building the professional working relationships and business practices upon which successful product certification projects are built. Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA): Issued by the Federal Aviation Administration to manufacture aircraft modification or replacement parts, that includes design approval by the Aircraft Certification Office (ACO) and a production system approval by the Manufacturing Inspection District Office (MIDO). Plan for Software Aspects of Certification (PSAC): An agreement between the applicant and the Federal Aviation Administration describing how the applicant will satisfy the objectives of Radio Technical Comission for Aeronautics Document DO-178B, Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification. Product Certification: The complete certification cycle that includes type certification (design approval), production certification (production approval), airworthiness certification (airworthiness approval) and continued airworthiness management. Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP): A Plan that addresses the specific issues of a specific project. It sets the expectations for the project. It is not a legally binding agreement but a mutual statement the intent of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Applicant to hold their respective personnel accountable for the success of the project. Type or Significant Supplemental Type Certificate Project: (For the purposes of this document) Any new type certificate application. Any application for amended type certificate or new/amended supplement type certificate in which: • The design appears to require special conditions, exemptions, or equivalent safety findings or a certification basis derived from an unusual application of 14 code of federal regulations §§ 21.101(a)(2) or 21.101(b). • The design uses novel or unusual methods of construction. • The design changes the kinematics, dynamics, or configuration of either the flight control system or rotor drive system. • The design change would substantially alter the aircraft’s flight characteristics. • The design affects an area that has been the subject of a major service difficulty, accident, or airworthiness directive action. • The aircraft design changes the engine configuration from reciprocating to turbopropeller or turbojet powered. • The integrity of the basic load-bearing structure necessary for continued safe flight and landing or operation of the aircraft within approved limits is affected. • The design consists of new state-of-the-art systems of components that have not been previously certificated or for which adequate certification criteria have not been published. • The certification is likely to be controversial or highly visible. • Other significant projects or amendments as defined in Federal Aviation Administration Order 8110.4. ACRONYMS ACO - Aircraft Certification Office aircraft electronics association - Aircraft Electronics Association Aircraft Evaluation Group- Aircraft Evaluation Group AIR - Aircraft Certification Service airplane flight manual - Aircraft Flight Manual AFS - Flight Standards Service AIA - Aerospace Industries Association CEO - Chief Executive Officer code of federal regulations - Code of Federal Regulations commercial off the shelf - Commercial Off The Shelf CPI - Certification Process Improvement certification project notification - Certification Project Notification CSTA – Chief Scientific and Technical Advisor designated engineering representative - Designated Engineering Representative EMI/RFI - Electro-Magnetic Interference/ Radio Frequency Interference Federal Aviation Administration - Federal Aviation Administration FAR - Federal Aviation Regulations functional hazard assessment - Functional Hazard Assessment failure mode and effects analysis - Failure Modes and Effects Analysis flight standards district office - Flight Standards District Office GAMA - General Aviation Manufacturer’s Association joint aviation authority - Joint Airworthiness Authorities JTSO - joint aviation authority Technical Standard Order line replaceable units - Line Replaceable Unit manufacturer inspection district officer - Manufacturing Inspection District Office MOPS - Minimum Operational Performance Standard MIO - Manufacturing Inspection Office NAA - National Airworthiness Authority PHAC - Plan for Hardware Aspects of Certification PM - Project Manager PSAC - Plan for Software Aspects of Certification project specific certification plan - Project Specific Certification Plan Partnership for Safety Plan - Partnership for Safety Plan radio technical commission for aeronautics - Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics R&D - Research and Development SAS - Software Accomplishment Summary system safety analysis - System Safety Assessment supplemental type certificate - Supplemental Type Certification traffic control and air navigation system - Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System TC - Type Certification or Type Certificate type inspection authorization - Type Inspection Authorization technical standard order - Technical Standard Order technical standard order approval - Technical Standard Order Authorization VP - Vice President V&V - Verification and Validation