Title: Summary of the FAA’s Review of the Boeing 737 MAX, Return to Service of the Boeing 737 MAX Aircraft Author(s): Federal Aviation Administration Category: Report Tags: Accident, Boeing, MAX, Safety Executive Summary Introduction This report provides a detailed technical account of the lessons learned since the two fatal accidents involving the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft, as well as actions the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) took to ensure the airplane’s safe return to service. As the State Design agent, the federal aviation administration is providing this report to all States of Registry and to the general public to explain how the agency identified and addressed the safety issues affecting the 737 MAX. The FAA’s intent is to assure the global community that the 737 MAX is safe to operate and meets federal aviation administration certification standards. This report contains details of the FAA’s comprehensive review of the manufacturer’s proposed changes to the airplane’s Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System). This includes associated system parts, software and mechanical characteristics, safety assumptions, and systems assessments. Additionally, this report discusses the design, operation, revised pilot training, and maintenance changes that effectively address the causes of the Lion Air Flight 610 (JT610) and Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 (ET302) accidents. During its evaluation of Boeing’s proposed modifications, the federal aviation administration retained all compliance findings and approvals associated with the design changes related to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. This thorough review has taken more than 22 months and included the full-time work of more than 40 engineers, inspectors, pilots, and technical support staff. The effort represents more than 60,000 federal aviation administration hours of review, certification testing, and evaluation of pertinent documents. This includes approximately 50 hours of federal aviation administration flight or simulator tests and federal aviation administration analysis of more than 4,000 hours of company flight and simulator testing. The federal aviation administration has a longstanding commitment to transparency, continuous improvement, and information sharing to encourage increased aviation safety worldwide. To these ends, the agency supported numerous reviews, investigations, and robust international engagement with fellow Civil Aviation Authorities (CAAs). The federal aviation administration took into account the final recommendations of the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and Indonesia’s Komite Nasional Keselamatan Transportasi (Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee ), as well as all available preliminary information from the accident investigations. The federal aviation administration and other U.S. bodies commissioned a number of studies to evaluate the initial certification of the 737 MAX, as well as the certification process itself. The federal aviation administration invited nine other Civil Aviation Authorities to be a part of the Joint Authorities Technical Review (JATR), which assessed the certification of the 737 MAX flight control system. The federal aviation administration took into consideration all relevant findings of the Joint Authority Technical Review, as well as those of the U.S. Department of Transportation Special Committee, the U.S. Department of Transportation Office of the Inspector General (OIG), and other expert reviews. The federal aviation administration also commissioned a Technical Advisory Board (Technical Advisory Board) to independently review Boeing’s proposed corrective actions. The Technical Advisory Board consisted of a number of technical experts with no involvement in the initial certification of the 737 MAX. Several of these experts were from other U.S. government agencies. The actions by the federal aviation administration and Boeing, summarized in this report, adopted the Technical Advisory Board’s recommendations. This summary is part of the FAA’s extensive outreach to technical experts from Civil Aviation Authorities around the globe to address their concerns about the aircraft. The federal aviation administration also actively supported concurrent validation activities of the aircraft by the Civil Aviation Authorities of other States for the Design of large transport airplanes. Each authority will make its own assessment of the FAA’s process and findings, as well as Boeing’s actions to address the findings. Due to the nature of the certification process, the federal aviation administration continually engaged with the Civil Aviation Authorities on all aspects of the review. Likewise, all of the civil aviation authorities reviewed identical data from Boeing to make their own findings. Details of the aircraft’s flight control system, as well as the FAA’s evaluation and validation of the changes to the design of the flight control system, are contained in the body of this report. This report also includes the FAA’s decision-making logic and supporting information. Post-Accident Actions On October 29, 2018, Lion Air Flight 610 (JT610), a Boeing 737 MAX, crashed shortly after takeoff in Jakarta, Indonesia. On November 5, 2018, after evidence emerged of a potential contributor to the accident, the federal aviation administration conducted a preliminary risk assessment using the continued operation safety process established in federal aviation administration Order 8110.107A, Monitor Safety/Analyze Data (MSAD). Based on this risk assessment, the federal aviation administration determined urgent mandatory action was needed. On November 6, 2018, the federal aviation administration issued a Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community (CANIC) (see Appendix D) to notify Civil Aviation Authorities around the world that the federal aviation administration intended to issue an Emergency Airworthiness Directive (AD) to correct an unsafe condition on all 737 MAX aircraft. On November 7, 2018, the federal aviation administration issued Emergency Airworthiness Directive 2018-23-51 (see Appendix C), requiring flight crews to use a revised runaway stabilizer operational procedure if they encountered certain conditions. The Emergency Airworthiness Directive was an interim action, and further action was planned based on what the federal aviation administration and Boeing learned from investigating the JT610 accident. On March 10, 2019, Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302, also a Boeing 737 MAX airplane, crashed shortly after takeoff in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Partial data (e.g., altitude, airspeed, and vertical speed) was available from a land-based Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) system. On March 11, 2019, the federal aviation administration issued another Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community (see Appendix D), indicating the federal aviation administration was actively involved in supporting the investigations. On March 11, the federal aviation administration received additional Automatic Dependence Surveillance-broadcast data. The data was analyzed and reviewed on March 12 and through the early hours of March 13. Also, on March 13, physical evidence from the crash site indicated that the aircraft was in a configuration that would have armed Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The satellite Automatic Dependence Surveillance-broadcast data from ET302, when compared with the Lion Air Flight Data Recorder (FDR) and physical data, indicated a potential causal link between the accidents. On March 13, with the potential relationship established between the two accidents, the federal aviation administration issued an Emergency Order of Prohibition (see Appendix A), grounding 737 MAX aircraft. As of this report, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee has issued its final JT610 accident report. The ET302 accident investigation by the Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau of Ethiopia is still underway. This report reflects the FAA’s review of the JT610 final report and of the preliminary and interim reports from the ET302 investigation. The federal aviation administration reviewed the contributing factors and available data from both accidents and reviewed the existing Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design to identify issues and determine the actions needed to safely operate the 737 MAX. The federal aviation administration determined that the aircraft, flight crew, and maintenance issues summarized in the chart below must be addressed. The chart also includes a summary of the required corrective actions, all of which are further explained in the body of this report. Safety Item #1: USE OF SINGLE ANGLE OF ATTACK (Angle of Attack) SENSOR: Erroneous data from a single Angle of Attack sensor activated the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and subsequently caused airplane nose-down trim of the horizontal stabilizer. Ensure that an erroneous signal from a failed single Angle of Attack sensor meets all federal aviation administration requirements, does not prevent continued safe flight and landing, and specifically, does not generate erroneous Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. Boeing updated the Flight Control Computer (Flight Control Computer) software to eliminate Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System reliance on a single Angle of Attack sensor signal by using both Angle of Attack sensor inputs and changing flight control laws to safeguard against Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation due to a failed or erroneous Angle of Attack sensor. Safety Item #2: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System RESET GENERATES REPETITIVE Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System COMMANDS: When a continuous erroneous high Angle of Attack sensor value exists, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control law uses pilot release of the electric trim switch to reset Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. Once reset, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System system will make another airplane nose-down stabilizer trim command after five seconds. This scenario repeats each time the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System makes a command, and the pilot makes an electric trim command of any duration and releases the trim switch. Ensure that if the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is activated, it will generate a single nose-down command activation. Boeing changed flight control laws to ensure that the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will not command repeated movements of the horizontal stabilizer. The revised flight control laws permit only one activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System per sensed high-angle of Attack event. Any subsequent activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System would only be possible after the airplane returns to a low-angle of Attack state. Safety Item #3: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System TRIM AUTHORITY: All Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands were incremental commands, which moved the horizontal stabilizer a fixed amount, regardless of the current position of the stabilizer. Therefore, multiple Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands resulted in a significant horizontal stabilizer mistrim condition, which the flight crew could not counter using only elevator control. Ensure that if the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is erroneously activated, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System preserves the flight crew’s ability, using basic piloting techniques, to control the airplane after the activation. Boeing changed flight control laws to include a limit for Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will stop commanding stabilizer movement at a point that preserves enough elevator movement for sufficient pilot control of aircraft pitch attitude for current operating conditions. Safety Item #4: FLIGHT CREW RECOGNITION AND RESPONSE: Flight Data Recorder data from both accidents show that the flight crews were unable to effectively manage the stabilizer movement and multiple flight deck effects that resulted from the single Angle of Attack sensor failure. Ensure that after any foreseeable failure of the stabilizer system, safe flight is not dependent on the timeliness of the flight crew performing a non-normal procedure. In addition to the software changes noted in Safety Items #1, #2, and #3, Boeing revised or added eight non-normal flight crew procedures to the Airplane Flight Manual and proposed additional training. The flight crew procedures and the revised pilot training provide the pilot additional information to recognize and respond to erroneous stabilizer movement and the effects of potential Angle of Attack sensor failures. Safety item #5: Angle of Attack DISAGREE: The Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message on the Primary Flight Display is not functional unless the Angle of Attack indicator option was chosen by the airline. This alert message is intended to be standard on all 737 MAX airplanes. Ensure 737 MAX Display System (MDS) software will alert the flight crew with the Angle of Attack DISAGREE message if there is a disagreement between the Left and Right Angle of Attack Sensors. Boeing has revised the Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message implementation to achieve the original design intent to be standard on all 737 MAX aircraft. Safety Item #6: OTHER POSSIBLE Flight Control Computer STABILIZER RUNAWAY FAILURES: A comprehensive review of the integrated System Safety Analysis (SSA) of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System by Boeing and the federal aviation administration identified an extremely remote Flight Control Computer failure condition that required timely pilot intervention to ensure continued safe flight and landing. Ensure that after any foreseeable failure of the stabilizer system, continued safe flight and landing are not dependent on the timeliness of the flight crew performing a non-normal procedure. Boeing implemented a cross Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor, which can effectively detect and shut down erroneous stabilizer commands from the Flight Control Computers. This makes continued safe flight and landing for this type of failure not dependent on pilot reaction time. Safety Item #7: MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES RELATED TO THE Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System: Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee final report for Flight JT610 shows several maintenance actions related to repairing and installing a replacement Angle of Attack sensor. “The replacement Angle of Attack sensor that was installed on the accident aircraft had been miscalibrated during an earlier repair. This miscalibration was not detected during the repair. The investigation could not determine whether the installation test of the Angle of Attack sensor had been performed properly. The miscalibration was not detected.” Revise the component maintenance instructions for the Angle of Attack sensor to ensure proper Angle of Attack sensor calibration during repair procedures. As part of Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee investigation of Flight JT610, the federal aviation administration evaluated existing Boeing Airplane Maintenance Manual (AMM) procedures for Angle of Attack sensor installation. Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee investigation (Reference section 12.3) verified these existing procedures for Angle of Attack sensor installation will correctly identify a mis-calibrated Angle of Attack sensor. The Collins Component Maintenance Manual (CMM) for the Angle of Attack sensor was revised to include a final independent check to ensure the repair has not introduced a bias. To ensure that each airplane's two Angle of Attack sensors are functioning properly upon return to service, operators must perform Angle of Attack Sensor System Tests on each airplane prior to its return to service. This test uses a fixture to position the Angle of Attack vane and verify that the reading provided by each Angle of Attack sensor is accurate. Immediately following the first accident and after issuing the Emergency Airworthiness Directive, the federal aviation administration instructed Boeing to address the flight control software. After the second accident, the federal aviation administration directed Boeing to address the common link between the two accidents. The federal aviation administration used accident data and expert analysis to target the software changes necessary to address the causes and factors that contributed to both accidents. Boeing’s initial efforts focused on changing the activation and reset criteria for the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control laws, which involved extensive pilot assessment in the simulator. As a result of continuous review and testing of Boeing’s proposed software design changes, the federal aviation administration took a broader approach to how the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System functions within the Speed Trim System (Speed Trim System). The result is an extensive set of improvements to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, with increased checks and balances at the system level. The updated Flight Control Computer software minimizes dependence on pilot action and the effect of any potential single failure. Summary of Changes to Aircraft Design and Operation Both the 737 MAX and the 737 NG include a Speed Trim System that automatically moves the horizontal stabilizer in response to changes from trimmed airspeed while in manual flight. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function is part of the Speed Trim System. The Speed Trim System provides increased aircraft speed stability as required by the FAA’s certification regulations — namely 14 code of federal regulations 25.173, Static Longitudinal Stability — so the pilot has a positive feel (pull- or push-force) when operating the aircraft faster or slower than where it is trimmed within the normal flight envelope. A key difference between the 737 MAX and its 737 NG predecessor is the 737 MAX’s larger and more powerful LEAP-1B engines. Because of their size, the engines are installed higher and farther forward than the engines on the 737 NG. The 737 MAX was designed to handle and feel the same to the pilot as the 737 NG. Without the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, in some small areas of the flight envelope — such as approaching a stall and during higher g-force maneuvering — the new engines contribute to the control column feeling lighter in the 737 MAX than the regulations allow. These are not areas of the flight envelope in which the airplane normally operates. However, federal aviation administration regulations - specifically 14 code of federal regulations 25.143, 25.201, 25.203, 25.251, and 25.255 - still require the control column to have a higher pull-force feel in these flight regimes than would exist on the 737 MAX without the added stability from the Speed Trim System and Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function. For the federal aviation administration to certify the 737 MAX, the original design had to meet federal aviation administration requirements for control force feel when maneuvering or deviating significantly from trimmed equilibrium. The aircraft manufacturer is responsible for making design decisions and showing compliance with applicable regulations. In this case, Boeing elected to include an additional flight control law in the Speed Trim System, which is part of the flight control software that provides required control force feel to the pilot. This flight control law, or Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, enhances the feel of the column forces in manual flight and is only operative with flaps up. Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System provides signals to move the horizontal stabilizer at elevated angles of attack to compensate for the aerodynamic effects of the 737 MAX’s larger and more forward-located engines, resulting in the required column feel to the pilot. Duration of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command is a function of the Angle of Attack and Airspeed. At higher airspeeds, flight control surfaces are more effective than at lower airspeeds. Therefore, a smaller Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command at higher airspeed has the same effect as a larger Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command at low speeds. Without the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, the 737 MAX would not meet the FAA’s regulatory requirements. Boeing proposed multiple updates to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function to address Safety Item #1: USE OF SINGLE ANGLE OF ATTACK (Angle of Attack) SENSOR, Safety Item #2: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System RESET GENERATES REPETITIVE Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System COMMAND and Safety item #3: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System TRIM AUTHORITY in the previous chart. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation software now includes a maximum limit of one nose-down stabilizer activation during a single elevated Angle of Attack event and cannot be reset by pilot activation of the electric trim switches. An Angle of Attack sensor monitor was added to prevent the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System from using an Angle of Attack input if it differs from the other Angle of Attack input by more than 5.5 degrees. Boeing incorporated a maximum command limit to disable the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and speed trim operations if the stabilizer position exceeds a reference position. This limit ensures sufficient elevator control is available to provide maneuvering capability using control column inputs alone. Additional Changes Related to the Flight Control Software Update. An additional software change provides cross Flight Control Computer monitoring to provide additional protections against Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System malfunctions or any other erroneous Flight Control Computer-generated stabilizer trim command and to address Safety Item #6: OTHER POSSIBLE Flight Control Computer (Flight Control Computer) STABILIZER RUNAWAY FAILURES. This monitoring is designed to provide additional protection against erroneous trim commands caused by possible — but unlikely — failures, such as a fault within a single integrated circuit in the Flight Control Computer. The software update to both primary flight displays (MAX Display System) includes improved Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation logic, which addresses Safety Item #5: Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message. The Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation is now always enabled, regardless of the Angle of Attack gauge option. An additional improvement locks the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation when the aircraft is below 400 feet in altitude. To reflect the various updates, Boeing proposed eight new or changed procedures in the Airplane Flight Manual (AFM): SPEED TRIM FAIL, Airspeed Unreliable, Angle of Attack DISAGREE, ALTITUDE (ALT) DISAGREE, Runaway Stabilizer, Indicated Airspeed (IAS) DISAGREE, Stabilizer Trim Inoperative, and STAB OUT OF TRIM. These changes, along with certain changes to training (see below), address Safety Item #4: FLIGHT CREW RECOGNITION AND RESPONSE. As a result of the design work to change the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System behavior and the subsequent review of the Integrated Speed Trim System Safety Analysis, the federal aviation administration required an additional evaluation of the related aircraft systems for all flight phases and system modes. The federal aviation administration evaluated Boeing’s determination of non-compliance with federal aviation administration wire separation. requirements. As a result, Boeing developed changes to the system, which included the physical separation of existing wires and/or routing of new wires in multiple areas of the Main Electric Trim and automatic Trim system. Training Enhancements The 737 MAX Joint Operations Evaluation Board (JOEB) concluded evaluation activities at London’s Gatwick Airport on September 22, 2020. The Joint Operations Evaluation Board included civil aviation authorities and airline flight crews from the United States, Canada, Brazil and the European Union. The civil aviation authorities and industry pilots selected for participation completed all scheduled tasks as planned. The Joint Operations Evaluation Board determined that all design changes applicable to the 737 MAX are operationally suitable. The Board’s evaluations also included assessments of Boeing’s proposed differences training and return to service training. The Joint Operations Evaluation Board, through evaluations of multiple crews from a globally diverse pilot group, determined that the proposed training by the applicant was acceptable. The federal aviation administration posted the 737 Flight Standardization Board (FSB) report, revision 17, for public comment on October 6, 2020. The comment period closed on November 2, 2020.After considering the comments received, the federal aviation administration published the final version of the 737 Flight Standardization Board report, revision 17, on November 18, 2020. This revision adds training requirements for the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, Autopilot Flight Director System (AFDS) enhancements, and additional Special Emphasis Training. The federal aviation administration added Appendix 7 to delineate 737 MAX ground and flight training necessary to operate the 737 MAX modified with the new Flight Control Computer software. You can view the final report on this page. Compliance Activity The federal aviation administration retained all compliance findings for its review of the certification plans for the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design change and the 737 MAX Display System software design change. This includes, but is not limited to, all test plans and reports associated with simulator and flight testing, all system safety analyses, the Plan for Software Aspects for Certification and Software Accomplishment Summary, and Service Bulletins. Boeing demonstrated compliance with software development assurance (DA) requirements for the 737 MAX Enhanced Digital Flight Control System (EDFCS) in accordance with federal aviation administration and European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) processes. The software Development Assurance process defines how Boeing develops, validates, verifies and manages software functional requirements. Boeing demonstrated requirements traceability from the design level requirements to the software requirements at the supplier level and back. Boeing also prepared a System Safety Analysis (SSA) that supports the FAA’s review of these requirements. Data from the simulator cab test and flight test were used by Boeing, and evaluated by the FAA, to determine compliance in the event of an erroneous elevated Angle of Attack event or a hypothetical single Flight Control Computer integrated circuit failure. Boeing and federal aviation administration analysis and tests demonstrated acceptable performance of software changes, such as the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation/resynchronization logic, Angle of Attack split vane monitor, and Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System maximum command limit changes. For human factors compliance, a variety of qualitative regulations address safety aspects of how humans recognize and react to multiple situations in flight and set the basis for the evaluation. These include 14 code of federal regulations 25.671, 25.672, 25.1302, 25.1309, 25.1322 and 25.1523. These aspects include the system changes with the updated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, change in the autopilot disconnect logic at the onset of the stall warning (stick shaker), and the integrated flight deck with the revised Aircraft Flight Manual procedures (checklists). Boeing and the federal aviation administration conducted multiple focused evaluations in an engineering simulator to validate the analysis of the design to the requirements. The evaluations included two-person flight crews of Boeing pilots and pilots selected from airlines operating the 737 MAX. Selections were based on the pilots’ employment with a U.S. or foreign air carrier, licensing level, experience level, and crew position. The selected crews were intended to be a representative cross-section of pilots expected to operate the 737 MAX. The federal aviation administration evaluated Boeing’s human factors analysis of the change to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function that shows crew workload is within capabilities of a two-pilot flight crew. The evaluation was supported by federal aviation administration observations and engineering simulator evaluations completed as part of the human factors evaluations. The federal aviation administration is aware of concerns over the potential role of stabilizer trim wheel forces during the accidents and therefore required an analysis and test of these forces. Boeing used the results of the analysis and test to show that the system is compliant with federal aviation administration and european union aviation safety agency requirements up to maximum operating speeds. Simulator predictions validated by Boeing flight testing, and overseen by the FAA, were used to calculate the required trim wheel forces and to further validate the existing engineering model. A mockup of the stab trim wheels was used to measure the force capability of appropriate pilots. Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is designed to function when the airplane has a high angle of attack, such as when approaching stall. The federal aviation administration required an assessment of any impact, by the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, to stall identification and basic airplane stall characteristics. Boeing and the federal aviation administration conducted an extensive matrix of testing to confirm that basic airplane stall characteristics comply both with and without Speed Trim System/Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation. During the original certification of the 737 MAX and again after the accidents, the federal aviation administration required Boeing to assess potential failures of the flight control system, as well as potential flight crew responses to those failures. The federal aviation administration evaluated Boeing’s assessment of flight crew alerting and found that it complies with regulatory requirements. The FAA’s holistic evaluation of the alerting system considered improvements to the system design, new flight crew procedures, and the revised pilot training. System Safety Analysis The federal aviation administration evaluated Boeing’s preliminary individual safety assessments on the flight control system and stabilizer showing that the designs of these systems meet all reliability and integrity safety requirements (see section 8.3.3 of the report). The federal aviation administration reviewed the final safety assessments to determine if there are any substantive changes from the preliminary safety assessment. Assessments include Failure Mode Effects Analysis, Functional Hazard Assessment, and Fault Tree Analysis. In addition to the individual safety assessments, Boeing prepared an Integrated Speed Trim Safety Analysis with an emphasis on the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, including upstream and downstream interfaces. The FAA’s review of the system safety analysis included an evaluation of Boeing’s Speed Trim System design changes to determine if any Speed Trim System failure modes rely on pilot reaction times to maintain safe operation of the aircraft. The federal aviation administration concluded through its review of the SSA, which was validated by Boeing through extensive failure modes testing in simulators that no Speed Trim System failure modes rely on exceptional piloting skills or immediate pilot actions. The federal aviation administration review of the system safety analysis also included an evaluation of Boeing’s Speed Trim System design changes to determine if any Speed Trim System functionality was vulnerable to other single-point failures. The federal aviation administration concluded that no other single-point failures are evident in the Speed Trim System. Return to Service The federal aviation administration rescinded the Emergency Order of Prohibition to allow the 737 MAX to return to service based on completion of the following actions: • federal aviation administration approval of the amended aircraft design. • Issuance of the Airworthiness Directive that mandates specific actions that owners or operators must take to correct the unsafe condition. Additionally, the following conditions are prerequisites to resuming operations in the U.S.: • For previously delivered 737 MAX airplanes, owner/operators must incorporate all FAA-mandated design changes and maintenance actions. • For any future delivered 737 MAX airplanes, Boeing is required to incorporate the same mandatory actions. All US air-carrier pilots must complete the 737 MAX special training described in the 737 Flight Standardization Board report before serving in a 737 MAX airplane. The federal aviation administration will issue a Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community for the 737 MAX that provides information to the global aviation community on a comprehensive set of actions that must be taken by owner/operators to ensure a safe return to service. The federal aviation administration will issue the Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community before it issues an Airworthiness Directive containing mandatory continued airworthiness information (MCAI). As other Civil Aviation Authorities consider returning the 737 MAX to service in their jurisdictions, the federal aviation administration strongly recommends: Civil Aviation Authorities with 737 MAX aircraft on their respective registries should mandate the pilot training identified in the 737 MAX Flight Standardization Board report as a minimum starting point. • Each State of Registry is responsible for the continued airworthiness and continued operational safety (COS) of aircraft on its registry. Accordingly, all States of Registry should adopt the final federal aviation administration Airworthiness Directive and mandate the same changes in their own systems. Conclusion Through a thorough, transparent, and inclusive process, the federal aviation administration has determined that Boeing’s proposed changes to the 737 MAX design, flight crew procedures and maintenance procedures effectively mitigate the airplane-related safety issues that contributed to the Flight 610 and Flight 302 accidents. The federal aviation administration further determined that the proposed design change also address safety concerns beyond those that the accident investigations identified. This report does not address other safety issues that might have contributed to the accidents but are not related to airplane design. This includes the airline maintenance practices, the aircraft operators’ compliance posture, and pilot training effectiveness. The federal aviation administration believes recommendations related to these other potential contributing factors should be addressed by the appropriate organizations. Furthermore, the federal aviation administration and international aviation authorities evaluated Boeing’s proposed flight crew training through the FAA’s Flight Standardization Board process. The federal aviation administration issued a Boeing 737 Flight Standardization Board Report documenting the results of the operational evaluation. 1.Purpose of Final Summary This report provides a detailed technical account of the lessons learned since the two fatal accidents involving the 737 MAX aircraft, as well as the actions the federal aviation administration took to ensure its safe return to service. As the State of Design agent, the federal aviation administration is providing this report to all States of Registry to assist in their understanding of how the agency identified and is addressing the safety issues affecting the 737 MAX. 2.Introduction The federal aviation administration has a longstanding commitment to transparency, continuous improvement and a global exchange of safety-related information that encourages increased aviation safety worldwide. The U.S., as the State of Design for the 737 MAX and signatory on the Convention on International Civil Aviation (Chicago Convention), is obliged to provide all States of Registry for the 737 MAX with the safety information they need to oversee the safe operation of the aircraft within their national systems. The ultimate decision to return the 737 MAX to service rests with each State of Registry. The FAA’s goal is to provide the global community the path by which the 737 MAX airplanes meet federal aviation administration safety standards and are safe for operation before they are returned to service. On October 29, 2018, Lion Air Flight 610 (JT610), a Boeing 737 MAX, crashed shortly after takeoff in Jakarta, Indonesia. All 189 people on board perished. On March 10, 2019, Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 (ET302), also a Boeing 737 MAX, crashed shortly after takeoff in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, killing all 157 people on board. In the days immediately following the Ethiopian Airlines tragedy, the 737 MAX worldwide fleet was grounded. On March 13, 2019, the federal aviation administration issued an Emergency Order of Prohibition (see Appendix A) grounding Boeing 737 MAX airplanes (737 MAX). A Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community followed the Emergency Order. The Indonesian Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee completed and published the JT610 accident report. The ET302 accident remains under investigation by the Ethiopian accident investigation bureau. The federal aviation administration provided technical support to both investigations. The agency’s technical support, along with the reports that the investigative bodies have issued, enabled the federal aviation administration to work with Boeing to identify both interim and long-term actions to address the safety of the 737 MAX. Safe operation of all aircraft, regardless of where they operate, depends on the proper functioning of the entire aviation system. To provide the desired level of safety, all stakeholders must embrace a culture that includes the open exchange of information. At the tactical level, aviation safety also includes — among many other elements — the design and eventual operation of aircraft, as well as proper training and maintenance. In fulfilling the FAA’s State of Design responsibilities, the federal aviation administration expects that the changes to the design, operation, training and maintenance of the 737 MAX outlined in this report will effectively mitigate the airplane-related safety issues that contributed to the JT610 and ET302 accidents. Since the accidents, the federal aviation administration has worked with the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), Civil Aviation Authorities, aviation community stakeholders, and Boeing to identify and mitigate all safety concerns and vulnerabilities, including unsafe conditions. This work includes review, analysis, testing, and evaluation of the proposed software updates for the 737 MAX series aircraft, as well as updated operational documentation (flight crew and maintenance procedures), and enhanced flight crew training. Open and continuous communication with the agency’s international partners is essential to global aviation safety. It is in this spirit that the agency regularly consulted with its counterpart Civil Aviation Authorities. Events such as Directors’ General meetings and webinars held periodically throughout this process demonstrate the FAA’s commitment to transparency. The agency will also provide the international community with mandatory continued airworthiness information (MCAI) as required by the international civil aviation organization Convention on International Civil Aviation, Annex 8. As stated throughout the certification process, the federal aviation administration will approve the 737 MAX for return to service only after determining it to be safe for operation. In addition to identifying the relationship of Boeing’s design changes to the causes of the accidents, the report highlights how the federal aviation administration certified the design changes, including operational, training, and maintenance evaluation of Boeing’s proposal. The report also provides details on the steps the federal aviation administration will take to return the 737 MAX to service and to rescind the Emergency Order of Prohibition that limited the operation of these airplanes. Consistent with international civil aviation organization Annex 8, the federal aviation administration as the State of Design has the authority and obligation to issue an Airworthiness Directive to address unsafe conditions when appropriate. The federal aviation administration issued an Airworthiness Directive, which mandates software and Airplane Flight Manual (AFM) changes, as well as other corrective actions. In addition, the revised 737 Flight Standardization Board report identifies relevant required training. The agency hopes this report will assist the agency’s partners in their respective decision-making processes on returning the aircraft to service. 3.FAA Continued Operational Safety Process The federal aviation administration Continued Operational Safety (COS) process is established through federal aviation administration Order 8110.107A, Monitor Safety/Analyze Data (MSAD). The federal aviation administration uses the Continued Operational Safety process to evaluate information received from operations to support its decisions for Continued Operational Safety of the U.S. operational fleet, as well as the global fleet for which the U.S. has State of Design responsibility. The Continued Operational Safety process informs federal aviation administration actions to correct hazards in airworthiness, operational procedures, training or maintenance. Monitor Safety/Analyze Data is a data-driven Continued Operational Safety methodology that provides a risk-based approach for safety assurance and safety risk management. Monitor Safety/Analyze Data supports aviation products throughout their life cycle. The process uses product-defined hazard criteria to reveal potential hazards from aviation safety data. In addition, Monitor Safety/Analyze Data establishes a causal analysis approach. This approach may identify underlying contributing factors, such as process breakdowns, which the agency then communicates to the appropriate stakeholder. The Monitor Safety/Analyze Data process is heavily based on industry best practices. Monitor Safety/Analyze Data builds a safety risk management model that provides a data-driven approach. This approach has evolved over many decades of experience and research by the FAA, in collaboration with the aviation industry and global regulators, and through partnerships with academia and other government agencies. Figure 1 below shows a generalization of the process the federal aviation administration uses. It should be noted that federal aviation administration Monitor Safety/Analyze Data guidance provides flexibility in how to approach any particular safety issue. This allows the federal aviation administration subject matter experts and management the freedom to bypass steps in the process based on unique circumstances. Flexibility in the process assures that safety — not rigid procedures — drives the agency’s actions. Further details of the FAA’s process can be found in Appendix B. 4.737 MAX Accidents and the FAA’s Continued Operational Safety Actions 4.1 JT610 Emergency Airworthiness Directive This section describes the FAA’s actions in response to the accident involving Lion Air Flight 610 and the pertinent details found in the Final Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee Aircraft Accident Investigation Report, Lion Air Boeing 737 MAX registered as PK-LQP, dated October 29, 2019. On October 29, 2018, JT610 crashed shortly after takeoff in Jakarta, Indonesia. The Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee (the accident investigation board in Indonesia) recovered the Flight Data Recorder (FDR). With assistance from Australia and Singapore, the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee conducted a preliminary Flight Data Recorder data analysis and shared it with the federal aviation administration on November 4, 2018. The Flight Data Recorder data analysis showed Angle of Attack (Angle of Attack) data input anomalies sent to the flight control computer (Flight Control Computer), unusual movement of the horizontal stabilizer trim system, and multiple flight deck effects. federal aviation administration and Boeing evaluations determined that airplane nose-down and stabilizer trim movement was consistent with repeated activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System) flight-control law (See Section 6 for a description of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function). The review by the federal aviation administration and Boeing of the Flight Data Recorder data showed that the flight immediately prior to the accident flight also experienced anomalous Angle of Attack vane behavior and corresponding stabilizer movement. The data indicated the flight crew correctly executed the horizontal stabilizer runaway checklist and used the stab cut-out switches to shut down the horizontal Stabilizer Trim Motor (STM) and therefore disable Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. This action enabled the crew to continue safe flight and landing to their planned destination airport. The federal aviation administration conclusion from this analysis indicated that an average crew with no prior awareness could sort out the failure scenario and could correctly mitigate the failure using existing procedures. The federal aviation administration conducted preliminary risk assessments on November 5, 2018, and determined urgent mandatory action was needed to mitigate the unintended movement of the horizontal stabilizer trim system in response to the erroneous Angle of Attack vane input. The federal aviation administration reviewed and modified Boeing’s proposed pilot interventions for erroneous Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activations. Based on this review, the federal aviation administration decided to mandate these interventions in an Emergency Airworthiness Directive (see Appendix C) to address this potential nose-down trim, which could make the airplane difficult to control and could lead to excessive nose-down attitude, significant altitude loss, and possible impact with terrain. On November 6, 2018, the federal aviation administration issued a Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community (see Appendix D) which notified Civil Aviation Authorities (CAA) around the world that the federal aviation administration intended to issue an Emergency Airworthiness Directive to correct an unsafe condition on the 737 MAX. On November 7, 2018, the federal aviation administration issued Emergency Airworthiness Directive 2018-23-51. The Airworthiness Directive was an interim action. The federal aviation administration planned further terminating action based on what the agency and Boeing learned from further investigating the JT610 accident cause. 4.2 ET302 Emergency Order of Prohibition This section describes the federal aviation administration actions following the accident involving Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 ET302 accident and the pertinent details found in the Accident Investigation Preliminary Report Ethiopian Airlines Group, B737 MAX registered as ET-AVJ, dated March 2019. On March 10, 2019, ET302 crashed shortly after takeoff in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Partial data (e.g., altitude, airspeed, and vertical speed) was available from a land-based Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) system. On March 11, 2019, the federal aviation administration issued a Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community (see Appendix D), indicating the federal aviation administration was actively supporting the investigations. The federal aviation administration received additional satellite-based Automatic Dependence Surveillance-broadcast data on March 11. The data was analyzed and reviewed on March 12 through the early hours of March 13. Also, on March 13, physical evidence from the crash site indicated the aircraft was in a configuration that would have armed Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The physical data and the satellite Automatic Dependence Surveillance-broadcast data from ET302, when compared with the Lion Air Flight Data Recorder data, provided a potential link between the accidents. Once the potential relationship between the two accidents was established, the federal aviation administration on March 13, 2019, issued an Emergency Order of Prohibition (see Appendix A), grounding the 737 MAX aircraft. 5. Identification of Design Aspects for Boeing to Address As of the date of this report, the JT610 final accident report has been issued, and the ET302 accident investigation is ongoing. Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee, with support from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and the FAA, documented the contributing factors that led to the JT610 accident. This report includes the FAA’s review of Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommendations in the JT610 final report. The ET302 accident investigation has not yet published a final report. The federal aviation administration reviewed the preliminary and interim reports from the ET302 investigation and affirms that all preliminary recommendations relative to the 737 MAX return to service (RTS) have been addressed. Because the ET302 report is interim, the federal aviation administration has not included the ET302 report recommendations in this report. The federal aviation administration reviewed the contributing factors and available data from both accidents and reviewed the existing Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design to identify issues and determine the actions necessary to safely operate the 737 MAX. The federal aviation administration has determined that MAX operators must address the aircraft, flight crew, and maintenance issues identified in the chart in section 5.2 of this report. The chart also includes a summary of the corrective actions, which are further explained in the remainder of this report. 5.1 Considerations During Corrective Action Development Immediately after the first accident and after issuing the Emergency Airworthiness Directive, the federal aviation administration instructed Boeing to address the flight-control software. Following the second accident, the federal aviation administration directed Boeing to address the common link between the two accidents. The federal aviation administration used accident data and expert analysis to target the software changes necessary to address the causes and factors that contributed to both accidents. Initial efforts focused on changing the activation and reset criteria for the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control laws, which involved extensive pilot assessment in the simulator. Later, as a result of continuous review and testing of Boeing’s proposed software design changes, the agency took a broader approach to how the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System functions within the Speed Trim System. The result is a more extensive set of improvements to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, increasing checks and balances at the system level. The Speed Trim System’s updated software minimizes dependence on immediate pilot action and the effect of any potential single failure. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System-related Flight Control Computer software update is not applicable to the 737 NG because the 737 NG does not include the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and is therefore not included in the federal aviation administration certification efforts in this matter. However, Boeing will also review ancillary changes that can enhance the 737 NG. The federal aviation administration will work with Boeing to ensure that any issues related to the 737 MAX design change that may apply to the 737 NG will be addressed as applicable. 5.2 Issues Safety Item #1: USE OF SINGLE ANGLE OF ATTACK (Angle of Attack) SENSOR: Erroneous data from a single Angle of Attack sensor activated the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and subsequently caused airplane nose-down trim of the horizontal stabilizer. Ensure that an erroneous signal from a failed single Angle of Attack sensor does not prevent continued safe flight and landing, and specifically that it does not generate erroneous Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. Boeing updated the Flight Control Computer software to eliminate Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System reliance on a single Angle of Attack sensor signal by using both Angle of Attack sensor inputs and changing flight control laws to safeguard against Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation due to a failed or erroneous Angle of Attack sensor. Safety Item #2: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System RESET GENERATES REPETITIVE Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System COMMANDS: When a continuous erroneous high Angle of Attack sensor value exists, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control law uses pilot release of the electric trim switch to reset Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. Once reset, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System system will make another airplane nose-down stabilizer trim command after five seconds. This scenario repeats each time the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System makes a command, and the pilot makes an electric trim command of any duration and releases the trim switch. Ensure that if the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is activated, it will generate a single nose-down command. Boeing changed flight control laws to ensure that the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will not command repeated movements of the horizontal stabilizer. The revised flight control laws permit only one activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System per sensed high-angle of Attack event. Any subsequent activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System would only be possible after the airplane returns to a low-angle of Attack state. Safety Item #3: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System TRIM AUTHORITY: All Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands were incremental commands, which moved the horizontal stabilizer a fixed amount, regardless of the current position of the stabilizer. Therefore, multiple Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands resulted in a significant horizontal stabilizer midstream condition, which the flight crew could not counter using only elevator control. Ensure that if the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is erroneously activated, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System preserves the flight crew’s ability, using basic piloting techniques, to control the airplane after the activation. Boeing changed flight control laws to include a limit for Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will stop commanding stabilizer movement at a point that preserves enough elevator movement for sufficient pilot control of aircraft pitch attitude for current operating conditions. Safety Item #4: FLIGHT CREW RECOGNITION AND RESPONSE: Flight Data Recorder data from both accidents show that the flight crews were unable to effectively manage the stabilizer movement and multiple flight deck effects that resulted from the single Angle of Attack sensor failure. Ensure that after any foreseeable failure of the stabilizer system, safe flight is not dependent on the timeliness of the flight crew performing a non-normal procedure. In addition to the software changes noted in Safety Items #1, #2, and #3, Boeing revised or added eight non-normal flight crew procedures to the Airplane Flight Manual and proposed additional training. The flight crew procedures and the revised pilot training provide the pilot additional information to recognize and respond to erroneous stabilizer movement and the effects of potential Angle of Attack sensor failures. Safety Item #5: Angle of Attack DISAGREE: The Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message on the Primary Flight Display is not functional unless the Angle of Attack indicator option was chosen by the airline. This alert message is intended to be standard on all 737 MAX airplanes. Ensure 737 MAX Display System (MDS) software will alert the flight crew with the Angle of Attack DISAGREE message if there is a disagreement between the Left and Right Angle of Attack Sensors. Boeing has revised the Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message implementation to achieve the original design intent to be standard on all 737 MAX aircraft. Safety Item #6: OTHER POSSIBLE Flight Control Computer STABILIZER RUNAWAY FAILURES: A comprehensive review of the integrated system safety analysis of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System by Boeing and the federal aviation administration identified an extremely remote Flight Control Computer failure condition that required timely pilot intervention to ensure continued safe flight and landing. Ensure that after any foreseeable failure of the stabilizer system, continued safe flight and landing are not dependent on the timeliness of the flight crew performing a non-normal procedure. Boeing implemented cross Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor, which can effectively detect and shut down erroneous stabilizer commands from the Flight Control Computers. This makes continued safe flight and landing for this type of failure not dependent on pilot reaction time. Safety Item #7: MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES RELATED TO THE Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System: Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee final report for Flight JT610 shows several maintenance actions related to the repair and installation of a replacement Angle of Attack sensor. “The replacement Angle of Attack sensor that was installed on the accident aircraft had been miscalibrated during an earlier repair. This miscalibration was not detected during the repair. The investigation could not determine whether the installation test of the Angle of Attack sensor had been performed properly. The miscalibration was not detected.” Revise the component maintenance instructions for the Angle of the Attack sensor to ensure the proper Angle of the Attack sensor calibration during repair procedures. As part of Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee investigation of Flight JT610, the federal aviation administration evaluated existing Boeing Airplane Maintenance Manual procedures for Angle of Attack sensor installation. Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee investigation (Reference section 12.3) verified these existing procedures for Angle of Attack sensor installation will correctly identify a mis-calibrated Angle of Attack sensor. The Collins Component Maintenance Manual (CMM) for the Angle of Attack sensor was revised to include a final independent check to ensure the repair has not introduced a bias. To ensure that each airplane's two Angle of Attack sensors are functioning properly upon return to service, operators must perform Angle of Attack Sensor System Tests on each airplane prior to its return to service. This test uses a fixture to position the Angle of Attack vane and verify that the reading provided by each Angle of Attack sensor is accurate. 6. Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System System Description and Flight Deck Effects The originally certified design of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control law enabled the system to activate repeatedly during manual flight (Autopilot OFF) and when the flaps are fully retracted. Once enabled, and if the airplane’s Angle of Attack exceeded a threshold, Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System provided the potential for multiple activations of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System automatic airplane nose-down stabilizer trim commands if the pilot used the main electric trim switch during the high-Angle of Attack event. The new design changes this behavior. Boeing modified the flight-control-law logic to ensure that Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation cannot be reset and command repeated movements of the horizontal stabilizer. During an activation, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System can be paused if the pilots use the electronic trim switches. Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will resume after the switches are released but will only continue moving the horizontal stabilizer up to the maximum remaining command from the original activation appropriate for that airspeed. The revised flight control law logic will allow only one Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation for each high-angle Attack event. After the manual flight maneuver that created the high Angle of Attack and consequent single Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System nose-down command, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System now makes an airplane nose-up (ANU) command to return the stabilizer to the pre-activation trim position upon returning to low Angle of Attack flight — if the pilot has not changed the trim. If the pilot has changed the trim during the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System maneuver, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will now return to the new reference stabilizer position set by the trim input. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System flight-control law will be reset once the Angle of Attack falls sufficiently below the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Angle of Attack threshold. For example, in the original and the new versions, normal Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation during manual flight would occur when the airplane is at a high Angle of Attack (such as during a high-speed tight-banked turn or low-speed approach to stall). During these maneuvers, the pilot may continue to pull back on the control column, resulting in a higher Angle of Attack. To improve pitch stability, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands a nose-down stabilizer. The result of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System nose-down input makes the control column feel heavier as the pilot pulls back. This heavier feel complies with control-force requirements in federal aviation administration regulations. After completing the tight turn and returning to level flight, the incremental stabilizer input made by Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System during the high Angle of Attack condition is removed by Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The updated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control law does not affect the attention, perception, and reasonable decision-making of the flight crew because there are no changes in flight deck effects in nominal Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation scenarios. For certain potential Angle of Attack failures, such as physical failure due to damage or a mis-calibration, the updated Flight Control Computer software reduces crew workload by inhibiting Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation and presenting the SPEED TRIM FAIL alert (which has no associated crew tasks). Section 6.1 describes Boeing’s design and functional changes that address Safety Item #1: USE OF SINGLE Angle of Attack SENSOR, Safety Item #2: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System RESET GENERATES REPETITIVE Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System COMMAND and Safety item #3: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System TRIM AUTHORITY. 6.1 System Description Both the 737 NG and the 737 MAX include a Speed Trim System that automatically moves the horizontal stabilizer in response to changes from trimmed airspeed while in manual flight for speed stability. The 737 MAX includes an additional pitch augmentation flight control law called Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, which affects pitch characteristics in manual flight, with flaps up and at elevated angles of attack, to compensate for the aerodynamic pitch effects associated with the 737 MAX’s larger, more forward located engines. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System enables the 737 MAX to comply with federal aviation administration regulatory requirements for certain handling qualities and cannot be removed unless replaced with a comparable system. Boeing has not presented a comparable system, so the need for a Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System remains. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System flight-control law is part of the Speed Trim System and is commanded by the Flight Control Computer using data from sensors and other airplane systems. As a stability-augmentation system, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System automatically makes commands without pilot action. Either pilot can override Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands to control the stabilizer by using the electric stabilizer trim switches on the control wheel. Additionally, flight crews can set the STAB TRIM CUTOUT switches on the Center control stand to CUTOUT to stop and disable the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System flight-control law becomes active when the airplane exceeds an Angle of Attack threshold that varies depending on Mach (airspeed). If activated by a high Angle of Attack, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System moves the horizontal stabilizer at a rate of 0.27 degrees per second, which is the same trim rate as Speed Trim with flaps down. The magnitude of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command is a function of Mach and angle of attack. At higher airspeeds, flight-control surfaces are more effective than at lower airspeeds. Therefore, a smaller Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command at higher airspeeds has the same effect as a larger Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command at lower speeds. At low Mach, when the stabilizer has lower effectiveness, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command can be up to the maximum of 2.5 degrees of incremental stabilizer movement. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System flight control law is reset after the Angle of Attack falls sufficiently below the Angle of Attack threshold. 6.1.1 Overview of Updated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Flight Control Laws This section describes multiple updates within the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation and resynchronization logic limit airplane nose-down stabilizer command during a single elevated Angle of Attack event. Once the Angle of Attack has been reduced, the system will return the stabilizer to a new reference trim position if the pilot activates electric trim while the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is making a command, which will account for any pilot trim input made during the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command. An Angle of Attack split-vane monitor and middle-value select (MVS) have been added to prevent the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System from using Angle of Attack inputs that differ from the other Angle of Attack input by more than 5.5 degrees. Boeing set the designed Angle of Attack input differential threshold of 5.5 degrees, based on electro-mechanical tolerances of the sensor and normal transient aerodynamic effects on the Angle of Attack sensors mounted on opposite sides of the fuselage during flight with flaps up. Middle-Value Select logic has been added to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Angle of Attack signal processing to mitigate the potential hazard of undetected erroneous oscillatory Angle of Attack signal. The Angle of Attack split-vane monitor threshold is large enough to allow for expected variations in Angle of Attack sensors but small enough to prevent Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation due to erroneous Angle of Attack data. Forward column cutout switch interaction with the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System flight-control law is accounted for in order to accommodate trim interruption caused by potential activation of the cutout switch when returning the stabilizer to the trim position once the Angle of Attack has been reduced. A maximum command limit is incorporated that will disable Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim operations if the stabilizer position exceeds a reference position to ensure sufficient handling capability using control-column inputs alone. Detailed descriptions of these changes are provided below. 6.1.2 Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Activation/Resynchronization During the original 737 MAX certification, Boeing demonstrated compliance with certain regulatory requirements for handling qualities by the functionality of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The airplane-level requirement to be compliant with those regulations remains, so the need for Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System remains unchanged. The updated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design retains the original Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation thresholds for nominal conditions (i.e., absent sensor failures or pilot electric trim interaction). The revised Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation criteria now include a requirement for the Angle of Attack to transition from a low Angle of Attack state (below the threshold) to a high Angle of Attack state (above the threshold) after the airplane is in the configuration and flight region where Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is utilized (flaps up and manual flight). This single activation of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will be limited to maximum of 2.5 degrees of airplane nose-down stabilizer motion (which is referred to as a single Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command). Reset of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System system requires the Angle of Attack to transition sufficiently below the activation threshold. Since Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System no longer resets after pilot activation of the electric trim switch, the five-second wait time following Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System flight-control-law reset has been eliminated. Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation will be halted during the use of pilot electric stabilizer trim. Upon completion of the pilot’s electric stabilizer trim inputs, Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System may provide additional airplane nose-down stabilizer trim command if the Angle of Attack remains elevated and is continuing to increase. However, the airplane nose-down trim command cannot exceed a cumulative total of one Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System delta stabilizer table value (maximum of 2.5 degrees as a function of Mach) for each high Angle of Attack event. If pilot electric stabilizer trim is activated while above the Angle of Attack threshold, during the return to trim, Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System would only command nose-up trim equivalent to the amount of nose-down trim that Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commanded following the last pilot electric trim input. This will move the stabilizer to the new reference trim position. 6.1.3 Angle of Attack Input Monitoring: Split Vane Monitor and Middle Value Select (MVS) In the new design, each Flight Control Computer receives left and right Angle of Attack sensor values from the left and right Air Data Inertial Reference Unit (ADIRU), respectively. The Angle of Attack values are transmitted from the ADIRUs to the Flight Control Computers via data buses. During normal operation, accurate Angle of Attack values are transmitted over the data buses with a label that the values are considered “valid” by the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit. The Angle of Attack sensor electrical circuit includes wiring within the Angle of Attack sensor and wiring between the sensor and the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit. A failure of that electrical circuit (e.g. open, short, etc.) will be detected by the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit, and the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit will not transmit data on the bus as being “valid.” This failure scenario is referred to as a “detected failed” condition. Certain Angle of Attack sensor failures are not related to degradation of the electrical circuit and therefore are not detected by the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit. These failures result in Angle of Attack values transmitted by the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit as “valid” when, in fact, they are not correct. These outputs of the Air Data Inertial Reference Unit are referred to as “valid erroneous” data. Examples of failures that result in erroneous data include a bent or broken Angle of Attack vane (e.g. due to a bird strike or ramp damage) or a mis-calibrated Angle of Attack sensor (e.g. JT610 scenario). Each Flight Control Computer receives and monitors the two Angle of Attack sensor inputs from the ADIRUs and determines which Angle of Attack value to use in the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control-law calculations. Angle of Attack values are compared to one another by a split vane monitor and sent through a Middle Value Select algorithm. The split vane monitor compares two valid Angle of Attack inputs and will use them only if the difference between the Angle of Attack values is less than or equal to 5.5 degrees. If the difference is greater than 5.5 degrees for a specified duration, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim functions will be disabled for the remainder of the flight. The split vane monitor becomes active after the flaps have been retracted during flight. If the two valid signals are within the limits of the split vane monitor, they are put through the Middle Value Select algorithm. The Middle Value Select output is initialized at zero degrees. The Middle Value Select utilizes three numbers: the two current Angle of Attack values and the Middle Value Select output from the previous Middle Value Select determination. The algorithm determines the middle value of the three numbers by eliminating the highest and lowest values and using the remaining value (for example, for inputs 1, 2, and 4, the middle value is 2). The Middle Value Select algorithm is effective at minimizing the effect of a low amplitude oscillatory input value. The output of the Middle Value Select is used by the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function within the Flight Control Computer. Effect of Erroneous Angle of Attack Value on Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System — if the valid Angle of Attack value differs from the other valid Angle of Attack sensor value by more than 5.5 degrees for a specified duration the Angle of Attack values are considered erroneous, the split vane monitor will detect the failure and both the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim functions will be disabled for the remainder of the flight. Activation of the split vane monitor will completely disable the Speed Trim System (which includes both Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim System), will trigger a Master Caution indication, an illumination of the Flight Control (FLT CONT) annunciator, and an illumination of the SPEED TRIM FAIL light on the overhead panel. The Master Caution indication and the Flight Control annunciator can be reset by pressing the MASTER CAUTION PUSH TO RESET button. The SPEED TRIM FAIL light will remain illuminated for the remainder of the flight. In addition, an accompanying maintenance item is recorded for the loss of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim. The SPEED TRIM FAIL annunciation is shown in Figure 2. Effect of Detected Failed Angle of Attack Sensor on Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System — if a failed Angle of Attack circuit is detected, the Flight Control Computers will receive only one valid Angle of Attack value. The Flight Control Computers will utilize the valid Angle of Attack value to control Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The Split Vane Monitor and Middle Value Select are not utilized. During execution of the descent phase Master Caution recall checklist procedure, the SPEED TRIM FAIL light will be illuminated so the pilots will be aware of the condition. Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim will continue to operate using the available valid Angle of Attack signal. This design preserves the availability of Speed Trim and Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation after a single detected failed Angle of Attack sensor. A second independent failure during the same flight is considered to be extremely improbable. If a second independent failure affects the remaining Angle of Attack sensor, any resulting activation of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System would be limited to a single Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command (up to 2.5 degrees as a function of Mach). 6.1.4 Forward Column Cutout Interaction It is possible for the forward column cutout switch to be activated while the pilot is pushing the control column forward during recovery from an elevated Angle of Attack condition. If Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is providing an airplane nose-up trim command to return the stabilizer to the trim position, activation of the forward column cutout switch will pause the stabilizer movement. The forward column cutout interaction change accounts for the time during which the stabilizer is not moving due to column cutout. It finishes making the Airplane Nose Up trim command when the command is not being cutout, thus improving the precision with which Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System returns the stabilizer to the trim position. 6.1.5 Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Maximum Command Limit This change limits the total amount of airplane nose-down stabilizer movement Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System can command if there are repeated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activations. This ensures that the flight crew will always have maneuver capability through control column inputs alone, enabling the flight crew to maintain level flight without requiring use of the electric trim switches or the stabilizer trim cutout switches. The redesigned Flight Control Computer software compares the current stabilizer position to the stabilizer position that existed at initial Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. If the difference reaches a limit value that has been determined to preserve a maneuver capability with control column alone, then Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim operations are disabled for the remainder of the flight. Flight crew intervention is not required to activate the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Maximum Command Limit or to disable the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim operations. As discussed previously, when Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim are disabled, SPEED TRIM FAIL is annunciate and a maintenance item is recorded. Due to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System changes previously discussed, this command limit is not expected to be used but provides an additional level of safety. The maximum command-limit-reference-stabilizer position is reset by the Flight Control Computer after one consecutive minute of the autopilot being engaged, or five consecutive minutes of manual flight below the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Angle of Attack activation threshold, whichever comes first. 6.1.6 Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Engage and Stabilizer Trim Integrity Monitoring Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Engage logic is computed in the Flight Control Computer Lane 2 Central Processing Unit (CPU) and is communicated to the Lane 1 CPU. Lane 1 transmits the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Engage signal which allows the Flight Control Computer stabilizer trim to bypass the aft column cutout switch and sets the Stabilizer Trim Motor to run at the flaps-down Flight Control Computer rate. In the updated Flight Control Computer software, the Lane 1 central processing unit would only transmit Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Engage (as computed by the Lane 2 CPU) if the autopilot or Control Wheel Steering (CWS) are not engaged and the flaps are up. The purpose of this change is to reduce the likelihood of transmitting an erroneous Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Engage logic signal due to a Lane 2 central processing unit failure. In addition, the updated Flight Control Computer software replicates the mechanical column cutout functions using software. The Lane 1 central processing unit will inhibit transmittal of Flight Control Computer Trim Up and Trim Down commands by the Lane 2 central processing unit if the commands are in opposition to the elevator surface position by an amount greater than that of the mechanical control column cutout switches. The Trim Down command will not be inhibited when the Lane 1 Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Engage discrete is True. The magnitude of the software -column-cutout thresholds was set to a value outside the mechanical-control-column-cutout switches so it will not interfere with the mechanical switches while remaining effective if the mechanical switch fails to activate. 6.2 Cross-Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor The Cross-Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor is a new feature to address Safety Item #6: OTHER POSSIBLE Flight Control Computer STABILIZER RUNAWAY FAILURES and provides additional protection against erroneous Flight Control Computer trim commands caused by postulated failures in the Flight Control Computer Lane 2 central processing unit or I/O chips. This monitor is implemented in Lane 2 of the Flight Control Computer. While the Flight Control Computers are powered, each Flight Control Computer continuously monitors the other Flight Control Computer channel, except during dual-channel autopilot operation or when a Fail-operational configured airplane is performing an Autoland or automatic Go-Around. The Flight Control Computer channel in which the autopilot or Control Wheel Steering is engaged, or which is the Speed Trim System selected channel, is referred to as the operational Flight Control Computer channel. The other Flight Control Computer channel is referred to as the standby Flight Control Computer channel. The monitor compares the trim-up and trim-down command outputs from both Flight Control Computers with its own trim command calculation. The operational channel performs its normal stabilizer trim-command calculations for use by the monitor. The standby channel switches its data sources to use the same data as the operational channel to perform its stabilizer-command calculations for use by its monitor. The following discussion applies to either the operational or standby channel: If the stabilizer trim discrete outputs differ from the trim-command calculation in the local channel’s monitor for a cumulative one second, as determined by an up/down counter, then the local channel will take control of Speed Trim System (if it doesn’t already have it), and send a discrete to Lane 1 of the foreign channel, indicating that the monitor has tripped. This will cause Lane 1 of the foreign channel to prevent transmittal of the foreign channel’s Lane 2 stabilizer trim discrete outputs. If able, Lane 2 of the foreign channel will then set a SPEED TRIM FAIL discrete that will be observed during pilot execution of the descent phase Master Caution recall checklist procedure as described earlier in this section. If the foreign channel’s autopilot or Control Wheel Steering is engaged when the local channel’s Lane 2 monitor has tripped, the autopilot or Control Wheel Steering will disconnect, accompanied by the autopilot disconnect warning aural and visual indications. Further attempts to engage the foreign channel’s autopilot or Control Wheel Steering will be inhibited. Autopilot and Control Wheel Steering operation may still be available via the local channel. In addition to the above, both channels will set the NO AUTOLAND discrete, causing NO AUTOLAND to be annunciate for the fail-operational configured airplanes. The channel whose monitor has tripped will also set the STAB OUT OF TRIM light to illuminate when on ground and below 30 knots. Illuminating the STAB OUT OF TRIM light on the ground ensures there is a maintenance action in the event the failed Flight Control Computer channel is unable to report itself as failed using the SPEED TRIM FAIL light. Cross-channel signals are added to ensure the Standby Flight Control Computer is in Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation any time the Operational Flight Control Computer is in Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation, reducing the number and duration of trim inhibits due to stab trim voting. The Standby Flight Control Computer performs a reasonableness check on the Operational Flight Control Computer signal to activate Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System to ensure the activation difference is not due to a postulated Flight Control Computer failure. During Boeing research and development flight testing of the 737 MAX’s updated software, a STAB OUT OF TRIM light illuminated on the forward instrument panel. Boeing determined that the illumination of this light was caused by differences in input data between the Flight Control Computers. Boeing revised the proposed final Flight Control Computer software to ensure that this indicator light only illuminates as intended. To reduce nuisance trips of the Command Response Monitor due to stab-trim voting logic, the Standby Flight Control Computer stabilizer-trim calculations have been aligned further by using Operational Flight Control Computer elevator commands directly. The Command Response Monitor sets the STAB OUT OF TRIM light while autopilot is engaged. An additional monitor, the Autopilot Elevator Command Integrity Monitor, was added to ensure the integrity of using the elevator command signal in the Standby Flight Control Computer stabilizer trim calculations, which can be corrupted by postulated Flight Control Computer Lane 1 failures. A power-up test was added to the Flight Control Computer software to verify the availability of the Flight Control Computer hardware switches used by the Cross-Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor to disable the Lane 2 stabilizer trim discrete and check for the external trim wrap-around used by the Cross-Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor to detect the trim outputs of the other Flight Control Computer. This test runs on power-up and after every landing. 6.3 Additional Flight Control System Enhancements This section provides a description of additional autopilot changes Boeing included in the Flight Control Computer software update. The changes are related to low airspeed conditions and affect how the autopilot functions and what the flight director will show on the Primary Flight Displays (PFDs). Although these changes are unrelated to the JT610 and ET302 accidents, Boeing elected to include them in this design change. In earlier Flight Control Computer software versions, the autopilot/flight director provided active-speed protection, or reversion to active-speed protection, in all pitch modes with the exception of Altitude Hold (ALT HLD), Vertical Navigation PATH (Altitude Hold), Glideslope (G/S), Glidepath (G/P), Flare and, when flaps are at 15 or greater, Vertical Speed (V/S) and Vertical Navigation PATH (V/S). For modes that do not have active-speed protection, the autothrottle provides speed protection if engaged in speed mode. Additionally, an existing “AIRSPEED LOW” aural and visual alert and a flashing amber airspeed callout box are provided to alert the flight crew if the airspeed decreases into the amber band. For these modes, if the airspeed is allowed to decrease below stick-shaker speed, the Flight Control Computer would continue to provide autopilot and flight-director commands to maintain the command path, including pitch-up commands if below the pitch target. Nose-up auto-trim is inhibited when at or below stick-shaker speed. The updated Flight Control Computer software incorporates the following enhancements that improve the behaviour of the autopilot/flight director in the event that the airspeed decreases into the amber band: • Autopilot Automatic Stabilizer Trim Inhibit — During flaps-down autopilot operation, nose-up automatic trim is inhibited at 3 knots below the amber band speed. During simulator cab evaluations, this change improved pitch characteristics at autopilot disconnect. No change to the inhibit logic was required for flaps-up autopilot operation due to the activation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System upon autopilot disconnect. • Autopilot Disconnect and Flight Director Bias Out of View (BOV) — For the autopilot/flight director modes that do not provide active-speed protection, with the exception of Flare mode, the autopilot will disconnect one second after stick shaker activation. Simultaneously, the pitch and roll-flight-director guidance will Bia out of View, which means the vertical and horizontal flight-director bars will not be visible on the Primary Flight Display (PFD). Pitch and roll flight-director guidance will return when the airspeed returns to the top of the amber band. The roll mode will remain unchanged when the flight director guidance resumes. The pitch mode will transition to Level Change (LVL CHG) if the previous mode was Altitude Hold or Vertical Navigation PATH (Altitude Hold), or will remain unchanged if the mode is G/S, G/P, V/S or Vertical Navigation PATH (V/S). Re-engagement of the autopilot is inhibited until the airspeed returns to the top of the amber band. Flight-director guidance can be brought back, and the autopilot engagement inhibit can be removed before airspeed returns to the top of the amber band by selecting pitch modes with reversionary speed protection. Using Level Change or V/S for flaps up through flaps 10 or Level Change for any flap setting will restore flight director guidance and enable re- engagement of the autopilot while still in the amber band. Selection of TO/GA, when that mode is available, will also bring back the flight-director guidance and remove the autopilot engagement inhibit. For G/S or G/P, only the selection of TO/GA will bring back the flight-director guidance and remove the autopilot engage inhibit prior to reaching the top of the amber band because other mode selections are not allowed. The Autopilot Disconnect and Flight Director Bia out of View changes do not apply to dual-channel operations or redundant latch due to the short duration of the associated flight phase; the priority given to following the command path; the high level of pilot vigilance during this final portion of the landing phase; and the need to ensure autopilot and flight director availability during low-visibility conditions and windshear events. 6.4 MAX Display System (MDS) Updates for Angle of Attack DISAGREE The 737 MAX MDS software change updates the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation logic and addresses Safety Item #5: Angle of Attack DISAGREE. The Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation is displayed on the captain’s and first officer’s Primary Function Display when the left and right Angle of Attack values differ by more than 10 degrees for longer than 10 continuous seconds. An optional Angle of Attack gauge displays the Angle of Attack value on the captain’s and first officer’s Primary Function Display when the option is enabled. The Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation and Angle of Attack gauge are illustrated in Figure 4. Prior to the change, the 737 MAX MDS software: • Associated the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation with the Angle of Attack gauge option, such that the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation functioned only when the Angle of Attack gauge option was enabled. • Allowed blanking of the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation below 400'. The 737 MAX MDS software change updates the MDS software to: • Ensure the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation logic is always enabled, regardless of the Angle of Attack gauge option. • Maintains the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation below 400 feet radio altitude displayed through landing to avoid the flight crew missing the alert during a high workload condition. In addition to the Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation changes, the 737 MDS software change updates the MDS so the software can detect whether different software part numbers are installed on the display-system computers. The DISPLAYS SOFTWARE CONFIG status message will be displayed if not all the display computers have the same software part number. 6.5 Non-Normal Checklists (NNC) Below is a description of changes to NNCs associated with the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design change that address Safety Item #4: FLIGHTCREW RECOGNITION AND RESPONSE. The federal aviation administration will include these non-normal checklist changes in the Aircraft Flight Manual changes required by the Return to Service Airworthiness Directive. The federal aviation administration also will provide the changes to operators via the Ops Manual Bulletin prior to return to service for incorporation into the operator’s Quick Reference Handbook (QRH). The NNCs are changed as follows: 1. SPEED TRIM FAIL To improve pilot awareness the condition statement for this Non Normal Checklist is updated to reflect that the Speed Trim System will be inoperative for the remainder of the flight. Stabilizer speed-trim inputs will not be provided when deviating from a trimmed airspeed. This checklist is included in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 2.Airspeed Unreliable To reduce crew workload, the Non Normal Checklist adds a step allowing the flight crew to determine a reliable airspeed indication without referring to pitch-and-power reference tables. The procedure for go-arounds allows for increased use of automation provided that the flight crew has determined pitch and power settings if flight director guidance is lost. A step to select the reliable transponder was revised to ensure that erroneous altitude information is not transmitted to Air Traffic Control (ATC). 3. Angle of Attack DISAGREE The Non-Normal Checklist is simplified to direct the flight crew to the Airspeed Unreliable Non-Normal Checklist when there is an indication that the left and right Angle of Attack vanes disagree. This checklist is added as a procedure in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 4. altitude DISAGREE The Non-Normal Checklist includes an additional step directing the flight crew to the Airspeed Unreliable Non-Normal Checklist if the Indicated Airspeed DISAGREE alert is also shown on the flight instruments. This checklist is included in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 5. Runaway Stabilizer The condition statement for this Non-Normal Checklist is modified to include situations when un-commanded stabilizer movement occurs continuously or in a manner not appropriate for flight conditions. The Non-Normal Checklist is reformulated to move existing text for controlling pitch attitude with the control column and new text to control airspeed with thrust levers into newly created memory steps, in addition to using main electric trim to reduce control column forces. A note that reducing airspeed eases effort needed for use of manual trim is also added. 6.Stabilizer Trim Inoperative This Non Normal Checklist is modified to emphasize information concerning use of manual trim. A note to reduce airspeed for improving use of manual trim was added to align the procedure with the Runaway Stabilizer Non Normal Checklist. 7. STAB OUT OF TRIM This Non Normal Checklist is revised to alert flight crews that the Cross-Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor has been activated in flight when the STAB OUT OF TRIM alert is illuminated on the ground after landing. An added step directs flight crews not to take off when the alert is illuminated on the ground. This checklist is included in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 8. Indicated Airspeed DISAGREE: This Non-Normal Checklist directs the flight crew to accomplish the Airspeed Unreliable Non-Normal Checklist when the captain’s and first officer's airspeed indicators disagree. No changes were made to the Non Normal Checklist and it is now included in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 6.6 Electrical Wiring Interconnection System (EWIS) Requirements (14 code of federal regulations 25.1707) As part of the FAA’s review of these design changes, the agency re-reviewed the entirety of the 737 MAX horizontal stabilizer control system. This review revealed that the physical separation of the horizontal stabilizer trim-arm wiring and the horizontal stabilizer trim-control wiring does not meet the criteria specified in 14 code of federal regulations 25.1707. The federal aviation administration promulgated this design standard in 2007 and therefore it is part of the certification basis of the 737 MAX but not of previous Boeing Model 737 airplanes. Certain wiring installations must have enough physical separation so that a wiring failure cannot create a hazard. (See 14 code of federal regulations 25.1707). Since design changes must comply with federal aviation administration regulations, the federal aviation administration requires changes to the wiring installation to meet the required physical separation between the horizontal stabilizer trim-arm wiring and the horizontal stabilizer trim-control wiring. This action brings the airplanes into regulatory compliance. The stabilizer trim-arm wiring has since been rerouted in 12 areas of the airplane’s Electrical Equipment bay and Section 48 to prevent a potential simultaneous short circuit between the stabilizer arm and control wiring and another 28VDC wire. The 737 MAX design change will include physical separation of existing wires and/or routing of new wires to ensure compliance with the regulation. (See Figure 5). 7. Training Enhancements The 737 MAX Joint Operations Evaluation Board (JOEB) concluded evaluation activities at London Gatwick Airport on September 22, 2020. The Joint Operations Evaluation Board included civil aviation authorities and airline flight crews from the United States, Canada, Brazil and the European Union. The civil aviation authorities and industry pilots selected for participation completed all scheduled tasks as planned. The Joint Operations Evaluation Board determined that all design changes applicable to the 737 MAX are operationally suitable. The Board’s evaluations also included assessments of Boeing’s proposed differences training and return to service training. The joint authorities, through evaluations of multiple crews from a globally diverse pilot group, determined that the proposed training by the applicant was acceptable. The federal aviation administration posted the draft 737 Flight Standardization Board (FSB) report for public comment on October 6, 2020. The comment period closed on November 2, 2020 and the federal aviation administration considered all comments made adjustments to the Flight Standardization Board report for clarity where needed. The federal aviation administration published the final version of the 737 Flight Standardization Board report, revision 17, on November 18, 2020. The final version adds training requirements for the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, Autopilot Flight Director System (AFDS) enhancements, and additional Special Emphasis Training. The federal aviation administration added Appendix 7 to delineate 737 MAX ground and flight training necessary to operate the 737 MAX modified with the new Flight Control Computer software. You can view the final report on this page. 8. Certification Project: Key Compliance Activities During its evaluation of Boeing’s proposed modifications, the federal aviation administration retained all compliance findings and approvals associated with the design changes related to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. This unprecedented level of review has taken more than 22 months and included the full-time work of more than 40 engineers, inspectors, pilots and technical support staff. The effort represents more than 60,000 federal aviation administration hours of review, certification testing and on-site evaluation of pertinent documents. This includes approximately 50 hours of federal aviation administration fight or simulator tests and federal aviation administration analysis of more than 4,000 hours of company flight and simulator testing. In addition, the federal aviation administration supported multiple concurrent validation activities with four foreign authorities and conducted regular outreach sessions with the applicable Civil Aviation Authority community. 8.1 System Change Development and Certification Process NOTE: Unless noted otherwise and in accordance with federal aviation administration rules (see 14 code of federal regulations 21.21) and policy (see federal aviation administration Order 8110.4c, paragraph 2-6.(j)(2)) Boeing developed all data (also known as substantiating data) and conducted all analysis and tests that are referenced in this report. The federal aviation administration oversees the process, reviews select substantiating data and may repeat any or all testing that the applicant conducts. 14 code of federal regulations Part 21 addresses changes to Type Certificates (TC) (see 14 code of federal regulations Part 21 Subpart D). The federal aviation administration approves major changes to type design using the type-certification process described in Chapter 2 of federal aviation administration Order 8110.4C, Type Certification. A type-design change is developed and assessed for effects to the overall airplane type design per requirements in 14 code of federal regulations 21.93 using an FAA-approved process. For major changes, the federal aviation administration must establish new findings of compliance for the changed areas. During a certification project, the federal aviation administration works with the applicant to manage the compliance activities and deliverables. The applicant describes the proposed change to the FAA, and includes functional and design details pertinent to the certification project. The applicant prepares a certification plan using requirements established by that model’s certification basis at the time of type certification (or amended type certification for a derivative such as the 737 MAX), as well as a description of how it will show compliance, including any airplane test activities. Once the federal aviation administration accepts this plan and either retains or delegates approval of the project, compliance activities can begin. Depending on the complexity of the change, multiple lower-level certification plans may be developed for each area of change (e.g., flight controls, stabilizer system) and individual items within each plan may be subject to federal aviation administration involvement. Compliance activities depend on the means of compliance that the federal aviation administration accepted in the certification plan. Some examples include: • Review of design against design requirements listed in the regulations • Calculation and analysis against performance requirements • Safety assessment using safety analysis techniques and documentation • Testing of components or systems in a lab against performance requirements • Simulator testing of functionality and interfaces in lieu of testing on an actual airplane, and • Airplane testing of specific conditions on the ground or in flight. Simulator and airplane test activities require creating a test plan providing details and rationale for the test conditions selected. The applicant submits the plan to the federal aviation administration for acceptance, in accordance with federal aviation administration Order 8100.4C. Test-related activities require the federal aviation administration (or designee) to conform the test setup and test article to verify that the test will generate data clearly supporting compliance and demonstrate how the change will comply. When testing is complete, the results — as well as applicable observations of the conduct of the test — are documented in an approved certification test report. Compliance activities serve as a demonstration of compliance to the federal aviation administration as well as a means to collect substantiation data for analysis and documentation to support a finding of compliance. This documentation becomes a certification deliverable. If it is required for project certification, the applicant submits it to the federal aviation administration or its designee for review and acceptance as justification that the change meets the applicable regulatory requirements. When the applicant submits all compliance data deliverables and the federal aviation administration or its designee approve them, the project is closed and the change is certified. Then, the certification is approved as airworthy when installed on an airplane and that airplane receives its Certificate of Airworthiness or, for aircraft in service, an approval for return to service in the aircraft logbook as applicable under the appropriate operational rules (e.g.,14 code of federal regulations parts 121 or 135) or maintenance rules (e.g., 14 code of federal regulations parts 43 or 145). 8.2 Certification Requirements Certification requirements are the regulations applicable to the systems and functions that are changed, as well as the airplane-level compliance effects of those changes. The amendment levels of the regulations are determined at the time of Amended Type Certification, as captured in the Certification Basis in the federal aviation administration Type Certification Data Sheet (TCDS) A16WE. The Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System was designed and certified for the 737 MAX to enhance the pitch stability of the airplane. As such, the design change is neither substantial (the change in design is not so extensive to require a complete investigation of compliance) nor significant (there was no change to the general configuration or the assumptions used for certification) from a product-level-change point of view. Rather, and most importantly, Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System enhances the earlier design philosophy to be more robust. Therefore Boeing was required to demonstrate compliance with the existing 737 MAX Certification Basis. The regulations below apply to the changes listed in Section 6. A description of these regulations can be found online in the federal aviation administration Regulatory and Guidance Library. In addition to federal aviation administration regulations, two Additional Design Requirements and Conditions (ADRCs) apply to this change. These two ADRCs are found in the Type Certificate Data Sheet A16WE. 8.3 Means of Compliance 8.3.1 Design Review The design changes to the Speed Trim System with updated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, autopilot disconnect at stick shaker, and the integrated Flight Deck, are not novel. The design changes upgrade the related systems and procedures, enhance the design, protect against the causal factors noted in the accidents, and add additional safety enhancements. The FAA’s review and approval of the Service Information to install the updated Flight Control Computer software in retrofit on the 737 MAX airplanes is based upon the agency's evaluation of Boeing’s design and the applicability of the parts and data. This review ensures compliance with the certification basis upon approval of the deliverables identified in the certification plan. This section is not all-inclusive but does highlight areas the federal aviation administration focused on (see note in section 8.1). However, Boeing addressed all compliance requirements in the certification basis (see section 8.2) 8.3.2 Calculations and Analysis Boeing met all development assurance (DA) requirements in accordance with the Boeing Commercial Airplanes Development Assurance Plan for Type Design Changes. The federal aviation administration approved this document. Boeing conducted an analysis of the updated Flight Control Computer software using updated 737 MAX engineering flight-simulation data. The analysis, which the federal aviation administration evaluated, assessed the installation, functional design, operation and performance requirements to show compliance with the federal aviation administration regulations listed in section 8.2 of this document. The analysis included a review of supporting Development Assurance artifacts that capture the system’s Development Assurance processes including requirements development, validation, verification, configuration management, process assurance, and safety analysis per federal aviation administration policy requiring that the objectives of society of automotive engineers Aerospace Recommended Practice (ARP) 4754A and european organization for civil aviation equipment ED-79 (two widely-used means of compliance) be satisfied for the Flight Control Computer software update. Data from simulator evaluations demonstrating performance of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation/resynchronization logic, Angle of Attack Middle Value Select and split vane monitor, and Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System maximum command limit changes, in the presence of an erroneous elevated Angle of Attack event, were analyzed to show compliance to 14 code of federal regulations 25.601. Similarity analysis was used to show that the findings from the 737-7 flight tests are applicable to the 737 MAX, and that the 737-8 simulator test results for the updated Flight Control Computer software are applicable to the 737-9. The analysis incorporated a representative flight-controls update to show the effects of the control-law improvements on the handling characteristics of the airplane. The extension of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command schedule to lower Mach numbers has an improved column force gradient during approach to stall than what is currently certified. The lower Mach numbers in a stall can only be reached at very light weight and low altitudes, which cannot be safely flight tested. The control-law improvement is limited to a very specific area of the control law for specific conditions as described above and in the System Description section of the certification plan. Hence, the analysis showed the change was compliant. For compliance with 14 code of federal regulations 25.1302, Boeing assessed the changes to the Speed Trim System with updated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, autopilot disconnect at stick shaker logic, and the integrated Flight Deck at the level of change for the system. The analysis was supported through assessment of the design in an engineering simulator per guidance in Advisory Circular (AC) 25.1302-1, Installed Systems and Equipment for Use by the Flight crew. Multiple focused evaluations with two-subject flight crews of Boeing pilots and airline pilots took place in an engineering simulator to validate the analysis of the design to the requirements. An analysis of the update to the SPEED TRIM FAIL caution crew alert and STAB OUT OF TRIM caution crew alert showed compliance with 14 code of federal regulations 25.1322 and Compliance Standard (CS) 25.1322. An analysis of the change to the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function showed that the crew workload is within capabilities of a two-pilot flight crew. Observations of engineering simulator evaluations, completed as part of the 14 code of federal regulations 25.1302 evaluations, supported the analysis. Note: The crew workload associated with the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function is assessed as being the same or less than the 737-8/-9 baseline. For compliance with 14 code of federal regulations Part 25 Appendix K, K25.1.1 and K25.1.2, an analysis demonstrated that the maximum flight time and longest diversion times are considered, in support of a 180-minute extended operations (Extended Operations) Type Design Approval, plus a 15-minute contingency. The analysis, which was conducted in accordance with an federal aviation administration Issue Paper, also verified that crew workload, operational implications, and the physiological needs of crew and passengers are considered with failure effects for the longest diversion time. . Stabilizer Trim Wheel Forces comply with 14 code of federal regulations 25.143 by analysis per european union aviation safety agency CRI B-17 because existing guidance does not cover stabilizer-trim-wheel forces. Simulator predictions, validated by flight test, were used to calculate the required stabilizer trim wheel forces and a mock-up of the stab trim wheels was used to measure the force capability of appropriate pilots. An analysis of the pilot's capability of applying force to the manual stabilizer trim wheel for defined scenarios where pilots may potentially be required to use manual trim to ensure safe controllability and maneuverability during all phases of flight will be completed. An analysis of the performance of Stall Identification Devices against requirements listed in 14 code of federal regulations 25.671(c)(1), 25.672, and 1309(b) was conducted. Although not directly affected by this change, this review was included to address additional questions raised in part by the FAA’s review of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design change. A review of the applicable compliance data ensured that the Flight Control Computer operates within acceptable electromagnetic effects limits for installation on the airplane and that the Flight Control Computer does not constitute a safety hazard within the installation environment during foreseeable operating conditions. Additionally, a similarity analysis of the baseline-tested Flight Control Computer and the modified Flight Control Computer software showed the form, fit, and function in the design are acceptable, and the baseline configuration has been tested in the required Electro Magnetic Compatibility conditions. An analysis of the update to the Angle of Attack DISAGREE caution crew alert in the flight deck showed compliance with 14 code of federal regulations 25.1322 and Compliance Standard 25.1322 in accordance with federal aviation administration policy for Flight crew Alerting in Advisory Circular 25.1322-1. 8.3.3 Safety Assessment Boeing completed individual safety assessments on the Enhanced Digital Flight Control System (EDFCS) and Stabilizer to show that those systems’ designs meet the reliability and integrity safety requirements for the 737 MAX. Assessments include Failure Mode Effects Analysis, Functional Hazard Assessments and Fault Tree Analysis. In addition to the individual safety assessments, Boeing developed an integrated System Safety Analysis (SSA) for the Speed Trim System with an emphasis on Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, including upstream and downstream interfaces. The integrated system safety analysis was developed to airport information desk in the showing and finding of compliance based on the integration of the systems noted above and their relation to each other. This decision meant the federal aviation administration had to review and cross reference systems without relying on Boeing’s computer-aided design tools. The integrated system safety analysis enabled the federal aviation administration to trace systems and make safety determinations using a single document that integrated the analysis, rather than simultaneous tracing through multiple documents. Reliance on Pilot Mitigations The FAA’s review of the integrated system safety analysis included an evaluation of Boeing’s Speed Trim System design changes to determine if any Speed Trim System failure modes rely on pilot reaction times to maintain safe operation of the aircraft. The FAA’s review of the integrated system safety analysis and validated through extensive failure modes testing in simulators, the federal aviation administration concluded that no Speed Trim System failure modes rely on exceptional piloting skills, and do not rely on immediate pilot actions. (See 8.3.2, 8.5, 8.6, and 9.1 of this report) Single Point Failures The FAA’s review of the integrated system safety analysis included an evaluation of Boeing’s Speed Trim System design changes. The FAA’s review determined that there is no evidence that Speed Trim System functionality is vulnerable to any other single-point failures, which can result in a catastrophic outcome. 8.4 Software The software life-cycle data was reviewed against radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-178B and DO-178B errata in DO-248B objectives and D6-85001 Revision G guidance. radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-178B and DO-178B errata in DO-248B are FAA-approved means of compliance used to demonstrate software development, quality and functionality in accordance with Advisory Circular 20-115D, Airborne Software Development Assurance Using european organization for civil aviation equipment ED-12( ) and radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-178( ). The review directly verified the Software Configuration Indices SCI to demonstrate they contain the correct information for creating the software and for defining the design baseline. The Software D6-85001 Chapters, federal aviation administration IPs, european union aviation safety agency Certification Review Items (CRI), and federal aviation administration Transport Airplane Issues List (TAIL) items that apply to this certification project are: • 737-8/-9/-7 Issued Paper SW-1a, “Software Aspects of Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification.” • D6-85001 revision G chapter 13, “Properly Overseeing Suppliers”, will be used by Boeing to address Issued Paper SW-2 “Oversight of Suppliers of digital Airborne System and Equipment containing Software.” • D6-85001 revision G chapter 14, Software Problem Reporting, will be used to address Issued Paper SW-3 “Management of Software Problem Reports”. This also addresses TAIL item "Management of Open Problem Reports." • TAIL item "Software Maturity Prior to Flight," is addressed with D6-85001 revision G chapter 18 "Software Requirements for Type Inspection Authorization". 8.5 Flight Test More than 4,000 hours of flight testing supported the design changes associated with the updated Flight Control Computer software and updated MDS software. These tests included certification testing to validate the system safety analysis and the determination of failure-effects hazard classification by federal aviation administration Flight Test Pilots in a conformed engineering simulator. Additionally, the federal aviation administration flew aircraft certification flight tests under Type Inspection Authorization to find compliance with 14 code of federal regulations 25.1301, regarding function and installation, as well as 14 code of federal regulations 25.1309, to confirm continued safe flight and landing following a complete failure of the Speed Trim System/Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System functions. Additionally, a matrix of stall-identification and stall-characteristics testing confirmed that basic airplane stall characteristics comply with those regulations, both with and without Speed Trim System/Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation. The federal aviation administration also flew engineering flight tests to validate manual-trim wheel forces and confirm that even for the most critical failures identified within the SSA, manual-trim capability was adequate through all phases of flight — and associated configurations changes — to accomplish continued safe flight and landing. (See 8.3.2, 8.6, and 9.1 of this report for further details.) 8.6 Flight crew Operations (14 code of federal regulations 25.1302 and 25.1523) Compliance Reports Boeing testing included extensive human factors and crew-workload testing. The intent of this testing was to observe the use of the integrated flight deck design by line pilots during operationally realistic scenarios. Section 25.1302, Installed systems and equipment for use by the flight crew, focuses on minimizing the occurrence of design-related errors and enabling the crew to detect and manage errors if they do occur. Section 25.1523, Minimum flight crew, focuses on crew requirements for safe operation considering crew workload and controls The federal aviation administration and Boeing used the evaluations to support: • Validation of pilot-action assumptions behind the updated Flight Control Computer software design and return to service for the 737 MAX, • Identifying any potential crew errors related to interaction with the Speed Trim System, including Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function that had not been determined through analysis, • Assessing that the design is error tolerant, • Assessing that the design changes to the Speed Trim System are clear and unambiguous, and • Assessing that workload is acceptable for failure conditions where there may be erroneous or inhibited Speed Trim System/Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System behavior. The tests used four airline crews (three domestic crews and one international crew), each consisting of a captain and first officer. Flight crews were from airlines operating the 737 MAX, based on employment with a U.S. or foreign air carrier, licensing level, varying experience level, and crew position as a non-managerial or check pilot. Crew selection was intended to represent the cross-section of pilots expected to operate the 737 MAX in air carrier operation. federal aviation administration flight test, Human Factors (HF) specialists, and Aircraft Evaluation Division (AED) operations personnel were directly involved with the planning and execution of the evaluations. In addition, both european union aviation safety agency and Transport Canada specialists participated as observers in the evaluation. The objective for these evaluations was to observe line pilot use of the flight-deck design related to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Flight Control Computer software during operationally realistic scenarios. Evaluations validated Boeing’s analysis, which examined usability of the design by flight crews, design tolerance to crew errors, and crew workload. These evaluations focused on the certification and design changes in the Flight Control Computer software, as well as how these updates integrate into the 737 MAX flight-deck design. These evaluations were scenario based and designed to be executed naturalistically without crews being directed to perform specific actions. Boeing selected, and the federal aviation administration accepted, test-condition scenarios based on the difficulty for crews to detect, respond to and manage various failure modes. The Failure Modes and Effects Analysis and Single and Multiple Failure analysis were used in developing the test scenarios. The scenarios included: Small Angle of Attack vane bias (less than 5.5 deg. threshold); Erroneous Mach on go-around; Large Angle of Attack vane bias (40 deg.); Sheared Angle of Attack vane on takeoff (just beyond VR); Pitch attitude error; Flight Control Computer inserts erroneous trim command and issues erroneous monitor activation with Autopilot engaged; and Flight Control Computer inserts erroneous trim command and issues erroneous monitor activation during manual flight. A minimum of four of the seven scenarios were presented to each crew due to session-length constraints as well as minimizing crew exposure to multiple conditions with similar effects and responses. 8.7 Flight crew Alerting (14 code of federal regulations 25.1322) Evaluation The federal aviation administration instructed Boeing to assess potential failures of the flight control system, as well as potential flight crew responses to the failures. The 737 MAX Return to Service activities include a top-down, holistic approach to crew-alerting requirements. The updates associated with the Flight Control Computer Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System software design changes, combined with training and procedure updates, address the known 737 MAX safety issues. The federal aviation administration evaluated flight crew alerting from a system perspective including consideration for the system design, updated flight crew procedures and the new training program. The 737 MAX Crew Alerting System is based on the Crew Alerting System of the 737 NG which has shown, through extensive fleet service history (more than 170 million flight hours) to be safe and effective. The 737 MAX design changed and added select alerts compared to the 737 NG to comply with the latest regulations or provide crew awareness of unique non‐normal operations. However, these were not extensive changes to the Crew Alerting System. The proposed Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design changes do not change the 737 MAX Crew Alerting System as a whole and maintain commonality with the flight-deck-alerting design philosophy and training of the 737 NG. Flightcrew alerts on the 737 are presented in the flight deck by indicator lights, displays, voice aural, tone aural, and stick shakers. Each crew alert is tied to a checklist procedure or a flight crew maneuver captured in the Quick Reference Handbook. Indications not tied to a checklist or maneuver in the Quick Reference Handbook are not considered flight crew alerts, and include indications such as failure flags on instruments, information lights on control panels, and normal voice aural callouts and aural tones. Visual warning and caution alerts presented in the flight crew’s forward field of view are readily and easily detectible and are inherently attention-getting during a normal panel scan. Most visual warning alerts are presented in the flight crew’s primary field of view in the color red or have a master visual attention-getting cue in the primary field of view or an aural attention-getting cue to assure immediate crew awareness of the condition. Visual caution alerts presented in the flight crew’s forward field of view are coloured amber and, where needed, have attention-getting attributes, either visual or aural, to assure the flight crew is adequately made aware of the condition indicated by the caution. The master caution function on the 737 MAX serves the same purpose as on all previous 737 models, and helps reduce crew workload by removing the need for scanning the overhead panel and aisle stand for the presence of new caution lights. The Master Caution and associated 6-pack (six-light annunciator panel) provide alerting in the flight crew’s forward field of view that are readily and easily detectable. Two master caution lights and two 6-packs are located on the pilot’s glare shield panel, which is within the flight crew’s forward field of view. The 6-packs identify 12 separate system panels or locations where a particular caution alert indicator light can be readily located by the flight crew. The current system design includes assuring all displays are viewable by both pilots for all lighting conditions. The revised Aircraft Flight Manual, including Non Normal Checklists procedures, clarifies recall items (minimum immediate actions). Specific changes to the NNCs will streamline execution by the flight crew when handing system failures, and in conjunction with significant improvements in the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design, reduce flight crew workload in handling multiple alerts. 8.8 Evaluation of the Airspeed Unreliable Non Normal Checklist Analysis of the JT610 and ET302 accidents indicate excessive crew workload is one of several causal factors in both accidents. Due to a single failure of the Angle of Attack sensor, the crews were faced with a controllability problem exacerbated by multiple erroneous indications and cockpit warnings that led to excessive crew workload. As part of the certification of design changes to the 737MAX, the federal aviation administration carefully reviewed all possible failure conditions and the associated flight-deck effects, which contribute to crew workload and possible mitigations for those contributors. The federal aviation administration determined that the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System original functional design — notably, a design feature allowing multiple, airplane nose down inputs from a single, erroneous high Angle of Attack event — was the largest contributor to crew workload challenges. The Boeing design changes (outlined in section 6) eliminate the controllability issues evident in these two accidents. The controllability aspect of these failures was, by far, the largest contributor to crew workload and the only flight-deck effect that prevented continued safe flight and landing. With these changes incorporated, this same failure now results in a workload assessed to be manageable by a properly trained crew without the need for exceptional skill, alertness or strength, and was found to comply with U.S. regulations that govern transport aircraft design safety during aircraft system failures. Additionally, the enhanced training program outlined in section 7, when implemented, will substantially increase flight crews’ ability to manage the remaining workload. The design-change improvements to flight-control-system behavior and subsequent controllability during failures notwithstanding, the federal aviation administration and Boeing considered other possible methods to improve safety through reduced flight-crew workload. The federal aviation administration and civil aviation authorities from other countries agreed that a means to silence nuisance stick-shaker events, (from erroneous high Angle of Attack sensor data), while not required for compliance, would reduce flight deck noise and potentially reduce crew distraction and workload. The federal aviation administration concluded that disabling nuisance stick-shaker events is desirable provided the method complies with appropriate federal aviation administration regulations and does not introduce new safety concerns. federal aviation administration and Boeing informally discussed several means to silence the single erroneous stick shaker. As other foreign civil aviation authorities suggested, Boeing and the federal aviation administration discussed adding a step or note in the Airspeed Unreliable Non Normal Checklist that provides the pilot an option to disable the stick shaker by pulling the appropriate stick shaker system circuit breaker. As with other aspects of the Boeing-proposed design change to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, the federal aviation administration tasked the Technical Advisory Board with studying the proposed alternative Non Normal Checklist (with circuit breaker pull) and providing an independent opinion of its merits. The Technical Advisory Board agreed that minimizing the effects of false and nuisance alerts is desirable and supported by federal aviation administration guidance (Advisory Circular 25.1322-1) that states, “a flight crew alerting system must be designed to provide a means to suppress an attention-getting component of an alert caused by a failure of the alerting system that interferes with the flight crew’s ability to safely operate the airplane.” The Technical Advisory Board therefore set out to answer a fundamental question: Does this [737 MAX] false stick-shaker activation interfere with the flight crew’s ability to safely operate the airplane? The federal aviation administration essentially answered this fundamental question as “no” by concluding that the effect on the airplane and crew of the failure is “Major” in the context of § 25.1309 System Safety Analysis and associated Functional Hazard Assessment. That is, safety margins are reduced, and crew workload is increased, however the failure does not excessively impair the crew’s ability to perform their duties. In accordance with federal aviation administration regulations and policy, and considering the probability and testing of failure effects if the effect is “Major”, the airplane can still be operated safely, so using the federal aviation administration determination a false stick-shaker activation does not need to be suppressed. If the effect is “hazardous,” (which is more severe than “major”) the false stick-shaker activation, owing to the probability that it could occur, would need to be suppressed. The FAA’s evidence for its “major” determination are (a) the flight simulator evaluations by federal aviation administration and Boeing pilots during § 25.1309 testing, (see sections 8.3 and 8.5); (b) airline flight crews used in § 25.1302/1532 tests (see section 8.6); and (c) service history of similar failure events on the B737NG fleet. By contrast, the Technical Advisory Board was unable to find objective evidence for a “hazardous” determination with regard to the test conditions, pilot skill levels, and reliability of the results. The Technical Advisory Board provided a commentary on certification considerations that suggests, as a routine matter for any certification project, the proposed CB pull NNCs should be supported by the necessary certification data. Ergonomic data and simulator test data need to be evaluated for compliance with all applicable regulations. In consideration of the Technical Advisory Board’s opinion, the federal aviation administration and Boeing considered an alternative Airspeed Unreliable Non-Normal Checklist that includes the use of a circuit breaker to disable an erroneous stick shaker on the 737 MAX aircraft. The federal aviation administration evaluated this alternative Non-Normal Checklist in addition to the same Non-Normal Checklist (without a circuit breaker pull) used in our certification testing of 737 MAX post-accident design changes. The federal aviation administration evaluation used multiple crews that included three certification-flight test pilots and three operations evaluation pilots who were all 737 type rated with a broad range of operational experience. The pilots’ stature ranged from 5 feet 6 inches tall to 6 feet 6 inches tall, which reasonably represents federal aviation administration regulatory requirements (§ 25.777(c)). To supplement the flight crews, federal aviation administration participants included a flight test engineer and two human factors specialists. Multiple tests were conducted using a 737 MAX engineering simulator and a 737 MAX full-flight simulator. In all, federal aviation administration crews performed 42 test cases and accumulated 15.5 hours of simulated flight time. The testing included use of a variety of circuit breaker collars that can airport information desk in identification, as well as ease of pulling the correct circuit breaker. The evaluation of cockpit procedures relies on engineering judgment in evaluating compliance with several federal aviation administration regulations including 14 code of federal regulations 25.771 Pilot compartment; § 25.777 Cockpit controls; § 25.1301 Function and installation; § 25.1302 Installed systems and equipment for use by the flight crew; § 25.1309 Equipment, systems, and installations; § 25.1523 Minimum flight crew; 25.1357 Circuit Protective Devices and 25.1585 Operating Procedures. The FAA’s test results found that all participants agreed that the alternative Non Normal Checklist (with CB pull) may not be in alignment with the intent of 14 code of federal regulations 25.777(a) and (c). Section 25.777(a) states that each cockpit control must be located to provide convenient operation and to prevent confusion and inadvertent operation. Section 25.777(c) states that the controls must be located and arranged, with respect to the pilots' seats, so that there is full and unrestricted movement of each control without interference from the cockpit structure or the clothing of the minimum flight crew (established under § 25.1523) when any member of this flight crew, from 5'2" to 6'3" in height, is seated with the seat belt and shoulder harness (if provided) fastened. Although the crews were eventually able to reach and successfully pull the appropriate circuit breaker, they were not able to do so while seated with their seat belt and shoulder harness properly fastened, or without excessively deviating their attention from their primary duties of pilot flying or pilot monitoring. The need to partially unbuckle a shoulder harnesses or seatbelt, as shown during federal aviation administration testing, introduces a new safety hazard during erroneous high-Angle of Attack events. One evaluator had to exit his seat and required an extended period of time to locate the circuit breaker. The federal aviation administration further found that the participants questioned the system meeting several other regulations (§§ 25.771, 25.1301, 25.1309, 25.1585). The federal aviation administration considered potential cases where a pilot pulled a nearby but incorrect circuit breaker. In one case, pulling the wrong circuit breaker indeed silenced the erroneous stick shaker but introduced other flight-deck effects that produced new and undetected hazards. The flight-deck effects in this case were difficult to immediately assess during testing. These additional hazards, combined with the poor accessibility of these specific circuit breakers, also introduced safety and compliance concerns to other federal aviation administration human factors regulations such as §§ 25.1302 and 25.1523. The federal aviation administration concluded that due to its determination that an erroneous high-Angle of Attack event poses a “major” rather than a more severe threat to aircraft operations, the potential safety risk introduced by the circuit breaker pull in the Non Normal Checklist outweighs the safety benefit of silencing a nuisance stick shaker in the 737 MAX. The international nature of aviation brings unique design challenges for manufactures in that each country must evaluate aircraft designs for use by their own operators and in consideration of their own operating environments. At the same time, the federal aviation administration and other Civil Aviation Authorities work hard to accommodate the needs of each country that operates an aircraft for which they have State of Design responsibility. The FAA, as the State of Design for U.S. products, must consider the design in the context of U.S. operations as well as worldwide use of the products. Such is not the case for the validating authorities, which are able to focus solely on the design within the context of their operations and training infrastructure. Many countries choose to accept federal aviation administration design approvals without change, while others may have unique requirements based on differences in their regulatory structure, operations and/or training. In most cases, minor adjustments to the FAA-approved design or adjustments to how the aircraft is operated are needed to account for the unique knowledge, skills and cultural norms of each country or region. For these reasons, it is common for an aircraft manufactured in the U.S., Brazil, Canada, or Europe, for example, to have variations from country to country in aircraft operating limitations or procedures. 9.Operational Suitability Evaluation, Including Procedures and Training 9.1 Flight Standardization Board The FAA’s Aircraft Evaluation Division (AED) is responsible for working with aircraft manufacturers and modifiers during the development and federal aviation administration certification of new and modified aircraft to determine: 1) the pilot type rating; 2) flight crew member training, checking, and currency requirements; and 3) operational suitability. To help evaluate some of these functions for the 737 MAX aircraft, the automated external defibrillator formed a Flight Standardization Board. The automated external defibrillator formed the Flight Standardization Board consistent with federal aviation administration Advisory Circular 120-53B, Guidance for Conducting and Use of Flight Standardization Board Evaluations, change 1. The evaluation results for the 737-8 MAX initial evaluation is contained in Revision 14 of the Flight Standardization Board Report, dated July 5, 2017. The federal aviation administration evaluated the 737-9 MAX and added it to the 737 Flight Standardization Board Report contained in revision 15, dated January 2, 2018. Revision 16 of the Flight Standardization Board Report, dated October 17, 2018 added the Boeing Business Jet 737-8 MAX. Following revision 16 of the 737 Flight Standardization Board Report in March 2019, the Flight Standardization Board evaluated an early modified version of the Flight Control Computer software to determine training and checking requirements relating to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The Flight Standardization Board conducted the evaluations at the Boeing Flight Training Center using the 737-800 and the 737 MAX series full flight simulators (FFS). The Flight Standardization Board first conducted a T2 test followed by a T1 test. It conducted both tests in accordance with federal aviation administration Advisory Circular 120-53B. The T2 test evaluated pilot handling characteristics between the 737 NG and the 737 MAX series aircraft during maneuvers when the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System was active. The T1 test evaluated functional equivalence between original and the earlier modified version software loads in the 737 MAX Full Flight Simulator during normal Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation and speed-trim-failed (Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System) conditions. The Flight Standardization Board evaluated the 737 MAX Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System operation in both normal and non-normal (speed-trim-failed) operation of the system including the following test scenarios: • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Operational: Approach to stall in the clean configuration and recovery procedures conducted at low, mid and high altitudes. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Failed (includes Speed Trim Failed): Approach to stall in the clean configuration and recovery procedures conducted at low, mid and high altitudes. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Operational: Extended Envelope to include upset recovery at high bank angles nose-high and nose-low scenarios as required by 14 code of federal regulations 121.423 using Advisory Circular 120-111, Upset Prevention and Recovery Training, guidance. Upsets were performed at low, mid and high altitudes. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Failed (includes Speed Trim Failed): Extended envelope to include upset recovery at high bank angles nose-high and nose-low scenarios as required by 14 code of federal regulations 121.423, using Advisory Circular 120-111 guidance. Upsets were performed at low, mid and high altitudes. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Operational: Windshear escape maneuver, and Ground Proximity Warning System (GPWS) escape maneuver in the clean configuration. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System failed (includes Speed Trim Failed): Windshear escape maneuver & Ground Proximity Warning System escape maneuver in the clean configuration. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Operational: Pitch stability evaluation with flaps up at minimum maneuver speed and high maneuvering loads. • Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Failed (includes Speed Trim Failed): Pitch stability evaluation with flaps up at minimum maneuver speed and high maneuvering loads. Following these evaluations, the Flight Standardization Board determined that no pilot handling differences exist between the 737 NG series and the 737 MAX series during normal operation of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, as well as when the Speed Trim System (Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System) is failed. The Flight Standardization Board determined that flight training is not required for the earlier modified version of the Flight Control Computer software. However, it determined ground training is required for initial, transition and upgrade training. Furthermore, recurrent ground training and checking is necessary to ensure pilot knowledge and retention is achieved relating to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System description, functionality, associated failure conditions and flight crew alerting. This initial Flight Standardization Board training and checking determination was a provisional determination based on no design changes to the tested version of the Flight Control Computer Software. The 737 MAX Flight Control Computer software subsequently required multiple modifications during the certification process. The final updated Flight Control Computer software required the Flight Standardization Board to re-evaluate for training and checking requirements. The federal aviation administration completed an operational evaluation of the proposed pilot training due to the aircraft design changes. The federal aviation administration conducted the operational evaluation jointly with Brazil’s Agência Nacional de Aviação Civil (ANAC), Transport Canada Civil Aviation (TCCA) and the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), as described in the next section. 9.2 Flight Standardization Board and Joint Operations Evaluation Board In September 2020, the federal aviation administration completed an operational evaluation of Boeing’s proposed pilot training due to the aircraft design changes. The federal aviation administration conducted the operational evaluation jointly with ANAC, Transport Canada and EASA. The federal aviation administration and the other Joint Operations Evaluation Board Civil Aviation Authorities concluded that pilots serving in the Boeing 737 MAX need to complete special training on the Boeing 737 MAX, including ground and simulator flight training. The federal aviation administration documented this special training in the Flight Standardization Board Report The Boeing Company 737, Revision 17, dated November 16, 2020. The report states the ground training must include but is not limited to, the following elements: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function description and conditions for operation; automatic autopilot disengagement; temporary flight-director removal (bias out of view) manual stabilizer trim operation and trimming techniques; effects of airspeed and aerodynamic loads on manual stabilizer trim operation; and recognition of flight-deck effects of an unreliable airspeed condition (e.g., Angle of Attack disagree or failed). The Flight Standardization Board report also states that the ground training may be completed using computer-based training. As further described in Appendix 7 of the Flight Standardization Board report, the simulator training must include, but is not limited to, the following events: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation during an impending stall (or full stall) and recovery; a runaway stabilizer condition that requires the pilot to use manual stabilizer trim; operation of each manual trim technique as defined by Boeing (which includes two-pilot intervention); and erroneous high Angle of Attack on takeoff that leads to an unreliable airspeed condition with special emphasis on the flight director biasing out of view. You can view the final report on this page. 10. Evaluation of new maintenance requirements 10.1 Software Upload Considerations The federal aviation administration Aircraft Evaluation Division validated the updated Flight Control Computer software upload and post-software installation checks. It also validated Airplane Maintenance Manual 22-11-00-740-815 for the new Maintenance Review Board Report (MRBR) task for the Operational check Built-in-test Equipment (BITE) the Arm Signal from Flight Control Computer to Stabilizer Trim Motor. Airplane Maintenance Manual task 22-11-00-740-815 (Digital Flight Control System (DFCS) FCS Speed Trim/Stab Trim Discrete Built in Test Equipment Test) was initially generated as the procedure for the Maintenance Review Board Report, which was conducted in accordance with the guidance outlined in Advisory Circular 121-22C, Maintenance Review Boards, Maintenance Type Boards, and OEM/TCH Recommended Maintenance Procedures. The task also satisfies the Certification Maintenance Requirement (CMR). 10.2 Maintenance Review Board Activity Boeing’s certification plan addressed certification of the final updated version of the Enhanced Digital Flight Control System Flight Control Computer software for installation on the 737 MAX model airplanes. The certification plan included a Certification Maintenance Requirement included in the Maintenance Planning Document (MPD) section 9. The new Certification Maintenance Requirement addressed Stabilizer Trim Motor Wiring inspections. The Maintenance Review Board Report outlines the minimum scheduled tasking/interval requirements for developing an airworthiness maintenance/inspection program for the airframe, engines, systems, and components of the 737-8 and -9 model aircraft. Section 2, Systems and Powerplant tasks, was developed from Maintenance Significant Items (MSI) through the MSG-3 process. Due to Flight Control Computer software changes (Ref. Boeing Certification Plan), a working group comprised of maintenance and engineering representatives from Boeing, several airlines, the federal aviation administration and Transport Canada reviewed changes to Maintenance Significant Item 22-11 automatic flight/Digital Flight Control System. The revised MSG-3 analysis in Maintenance Significant Item 22-11 resulted in a new Maintenance Review Board Report maintenance task 22-011-00, Operational (Built in Test Equipment) check of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System discrete with a 6000FH inspection interval. The working group also reviewed Maintenance Significant Item 27-40 Horizontal Stabilizer and Maintenance Significant Item 34-20 Air Data Inertial Reference System and determined no new maintenance tasks were required for these MSIs. The new Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System task 22-011-00 was approved for inclusion in the 737-8/9 Maintenance Review Board Report via a temporary revision by the 737MAX Industry Steering Committee (included the federal aviation administration and Transport Canada). 10.3 Instructions for Continued Airworthiness (ICA) and Maintenance Procedures The following Instructions for Continued Airworthiness documents will be updated as appropriate based upon the FAA’s review of Boeing’s system changes. 10.3.1 Maintenance Planning Document Changes to the Maintenance Planning Document included as part of the system changes are Item Number Maintenance Planning Document -22-020-00, generated to add Certification Maintenance Requirement reference 22-Certification Maintenance Requirement-01 that planned to operationally check the Arm Signal from the Flight Control Computer to Stabilizer Trim Motor. Additionally, Maintenance Planning Document Item Number 22-011-00 was generated to add Maintenance Review Board Report reference for a proposed inspection out of Maintenance Significant Item 22-11. The Maintenance Review Board Report 22-011-00 Inspection consists of an operational check (Built in Test Equipment Check) of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System discrete to verify the integrity at 6000 Flight Hours. The Airplane Maintenance Manual task 22-11-00-740-815 (Digital Flight Control System Speed Trim/Stab Trim Discrete Built in Test Equipment Test) was initially generated as the procedure for the Maintenance Review Board Report requirement. It also satisfies the Certification Maintenance Requirement. 10.3.2 Airplane Maintenance Manual Updates The Airplane Maintenance Manual had two tasks updated for both Chapter Airline Transport Association (ATA) 22 – automatic flight and Chapter 31 – Displays: Additionally, four system description sections (SDS) have been updated. • airline transport association 22-11-00 Digital Flight Control System Airplane Maintenance Manual Update: 22-11-00-740-815 Digital Flight Control System Speed Trim/Stab Trim Discreet Built in Test Equipment Test: Test for both uncommanded on for the stab trim motor (22-Certification Maintenance Requirement-01) and Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and stab trim discreet test (Service Bulletin 737-22A1342, Type Certificate 6000 hr. inspection). • airline transport association 22-11-00 Digital Flight Control System Description Sections Updates: 22-11-00-025 Speed and Stab Trim Analog Interface: Added more detailed description of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System for the column switching module 22-11-00-070 Speed/Autopilot Trim Block Diagram: Added more functional description of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System for the Speed Trim System 22-11-00-071 Speed and Stabilizer Trim Commands: Post Service Bulletin 737-22A1342 - Mach speed change (from between 0.2 to 0.84; to 0.15 to 0.84) 22-11-00-074 Speed and Stabilizer Trim Warnings: Added more detailed description of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Speed Trim • airline transport association 27-09-00 Flight Controls Multiple Use Systems/Units System Description Sections Update: 27-09-00-003 Flight Controls Multiple Use Systems/Units Panel: Added the system function for the speed trim fail light. airline transport association 27-31-00 Elevator and Tab Control System System Description Sections Update: • 27-31-00-017 Elevator and Tab Control System – Elevator Neutral Shift: Added the data for Flight Control Computer neutral shift function airline transport association 31-65-02 Display Processing Computer (DPC) Airplane Maintenance Manual Updates: 31-65-02-470-801 Display Processing Computer – Software Installation: Added the data for Display Processing Computer Software PN comparison with MAINT light indication 31-65-02-750-801 Display Processing Computer – Configuration Check: Added data to check the Display Processing Computer Software Part Numbers airline transport association 34-21-00 Air Data Inertial Reference System (ADIRS) System Description Sections Update: 34-21-00-024 Air Data Inertial Reference System - Angle of Attack Sensor: Added the data for the Angle of Attack Cross Compare and Angle of Attack indication. 10.3.3 Fault Isolation Updates The updated Flight Control Computer software uses existing maintenance messages to trigger the Speed Trim Fail and Stab Out of Trim warning light for internal faults to the Flight Control Computer. The message will latch if the detected Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System troubleshooting differs from the Flight Control Computer’s command. The maintenance messages below trigger an Interactive Fault Isolation Manual (IFIM) task for troubleshooting: • 22-11303: Digital Flight Control System - Flight Control Computer INTERNAL FAULT: Flight Control Computer-A internal failure: The Interactive Fault Isolation Manual task runs tests to determine if Flight Control Computer A needs to be replaced. • 22-11317: Digital Flight Control System - Flight Control Computer INTERNAL FAULT: Flight Control Computer-B internal failure: The Interactive Fault Isolation Manual task runs tests to determine if Flight Control Computer B needs to be replaced. The new overall process for troubleshooting the Flight Control Computer Cross-Compare maintenance messages on the ground is to: • Access the maintenance messages via Digital Flight Control System Built in Test Equipment on the Cockpit Display Unit (CDU) • Both maintenance messages direct the usage of the Cockpit Display Unit, and • If maintenance message is not cleared after Built in Test Equipment test, the corrective action is to replace corresponding Flight Control Computer. 10.4 Master Minimum Equipment List (MMEL) The federal aviation administration has approved the following changes in recent revisions to the Master Minimum Equipment List, which was posted for public comment. These changes have an impact on aircraft operators. Because of the design change and new Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System functional changes built into the flight-control software, dispatch with certain functions inoperative is no longer permissible. The most significant operational impact is that both Flight Control Computers must be functional for dispatch. Master Minimum Equipment List Item 22-11-01 effectively allowed dispatch with a single Flight Control Computer operative. In general, the specific changes below no longer allow dispatch of the aircraft (passenger carrying operations) with inoperative Flight Control Computer, Speed Trim System, certain Speed Trim System warning lights, or inoperative control wheel trim switches. Master Minimum Equipment List items modified or removed in submitted revision: 22-10-02 Autopilot Disengage Aural Warning System – the federal aviation administration will no longer allow dispatch of the Autopilot Disengage Aural Warning System (Item Removed) 22-11-08-01A Autopilot (A/P) Disengage Light (One Inoperative) – as a condition for dispatch, the federal aviation administration will require that the autopilot disengage aural warning system operates normally 22-11-10A - Control Wheel Autopilot Disengage Switches (One Inoperative) – as a condition for dispatch, the federal aviation administration will require that the Mode Control Panel autopilot DISENGAGE bar also operates normally, autopilot is not used below 1,500 feet Above Ground Level, and Approach Minimums do not require the use of autopilot • 22-11-01 Speed Trim Function – the federal aviation administration will no longer allow dispatch with this item inoperative (Item Removed) 22-11-02 SPEED TRIM FAIL Light – the federal aviation administration will no longer allow dispatch with this light inoperative (Item Removed) 27-41-01 Control Wheel Trim Switch – the federal aviation administration will no longer allow dispatch with one of these switches inoperative (Item Removed) 22-10-03 STAB OUT OF TRIM Light – the federal aviation administration will no longer allow dispatch with this light inoperative (Item Removed) 22-10-01B Autopilot System (Item Removed) 11. Return to Service Steps 11.1 Technical Advisory Board (TAB) 11.1.1 Technical Advisory Board Process The Technical Advisory Board, an independent team of experts, evaluated efforts by the FAA’s Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office (BASOO), supplemented by other federal aviation administration specialists, and efforts by Boeing associated with the redesign of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The conclusions from the Technical Advisory Board and the resolution of the findings directly informed the FAA’s decision-making on the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The Technical Advisory Board is comprised of federal aviation administration certification specialists and chief scientific and technical advisors not involved in the original 737 MAX certification program. Technical Advisory Board members also include subject matter experts from the U.S. Air Force, the Volpe National Transportation Systems Center, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Throughout the process, the Technical Advisory Board evaluated Boeing’s proposed Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design changes by conducting design reviews, procedure evaluations, and training evaluations. The Technical Advisory Board conducted these reviews considering representative flight conditions while Maneuvering throughout the normal, operational, and limited flight envelopes in the Boeing Engineering Simulator (ECB). The Technical Advisory Board evaluations included desktop data reviews, eCAB testing, and training development reviews. The federal aviation administration reviewed Boeing’s final design documentation to evaluate compliance with all federal aviation administration regulations. The Technical Advisory Board also reviewed the final Boeing submission and issue a final report prior to a final determination of compliance by the FAA. 11.1.2 Findings and Dispositions Based on the Technical Advisory Board’s findings in the Report to federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service-1: Technical Advisory Board on the Design Change to the Boeing 737 MAX Maneuvering Characteristic Augmentation System the Technical Advisory Board has closed and accepted the following 11 Return to Service action items. As an extension of the Technical Advisory Board review, Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office should complete an audit of Boeing’s development assurance process as documented in Boeing Document D6-86168. Action item closed. Audit completed. The Technical Advisory Board evaluated and accepted the Development Assurance Accomplishment Summary document. Boeing must submit further airplane level analysis and test data to ensure proper functional integration of the spoiler system with the trim system and Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. The Technical Advisory Board further clarified that Boeing needed to include a top-down assessment, or equivalent, that verifies the bottom-up Single & Multiple Failure (S&MF) analysis adequately covered combinations of Speed Trim System and spoiler system failures not shown to be extremely improbable. Action item closed. Based on the Technical Advisory Board review of the Boeing closeout memorandum and associated reference documents. Discussion in a meeting between Boeing and the Technical Advisory Board on September 23, 2019 led to the creation of a document to explain how Boeing’s Airplane Functional Hazard Assessment and System Functional Hazard Assessments for the 737MAX work together to form a robust top-down analysis for airplane and system-level functions, and how that top-down analysis is verified by the bottom-up S&MF analysis. The Technical Advisory Board evaluated and accepted the analysis. Boeing must submit the final version of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System fault trees. Action item closed- Boeing provided the final version of the integrated system safety analysis dated August 25, 2020, which the Technical Advisory Board accepted. Boeing must submit the complete root cause analysis for the automatic Stab Trim Monitor error in the fault tree for Low Altitude Stabilizer (design escape). Action item closed- Boeing provided close-out coordination sheet B-E325-FCS-19-024, June 19, 2019, which references the root-cause analysis. The Technical Advisory Board reviewed and accepted the root-cause analysis. Boeing to address the Flight Control Computer central processing unit and memory postulated failure issue discovered during eCAB certification testing. Item closed: The Technical Advisory Board evaluated new monitors to detect failures in P12.1.2 and evaluated thresholds by conducting eCAB testing. Boeing provided integrated system safety analysis with monitor coverage dated August 25, 2020. The Technical Advisory Board evaluated and accepted the integrated SSA. Boeing must ensure that the SPEED TRIM FAIL procedure in the Quick Reference Handbook encompasses both the speed trim function and the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function. Item closed: Boeing has incorporated changes in the Boeing Quick Reference Handbook. The Technical Advisory Board has evaluated the changes to the Boeing Quick Reference Handbook and found them acceptable. Boeing must add Angle of Attack DISAGREE to the list of additional information as possible evidence of an airspeed unreliable condition in the Quick Reference Handbook. Item closed: Boeing has incorporated changes in the Boeing Quick Reference Handbook. The Technical Advisory Board has evaluated the changes to the Boeing Quick Reference Handbook and found them acceptable. Boeing must submit final version of Level B training (i.e., Computer Based Training) to the Technical Advisory Board for review. Item closed: The Technical Advisory Board reviewed all level B training and Boeing incorporated appropriate changes to the level B training as documented in the Flight Standardization Board report. The Technical Advisory Board noted that Flight Standardization Board report Appendix 7 requires a one-time full flight simulator training profile. The Technical Advisory Board recognizes the one-time training requirement, classified as “special training,” was proposed by Boeing with consideration that the 737 MAX had been out of service for over one year and does not change the differences level determination and does not affect recurrent training requirements going forward for the 737 MAX. The federal aviation administration must identify if special emphasis training for 737 series trim wheel forces awareness (including manual trim force requirement) is appropriate. Item closed: Boeing provided and the Technical Advisory Board accepted Boeing Report D041A510, Revision A, 737-8/-9 Stabilizer Trim Wheel Forces, and trim awareness training per Flight Standardization Board report. The federal aviation administration must change Stabilizer Trim to Speed Trim System in airline transport association 27 Flight Control table remarks column contained in federal aviation administration Flight Standardization Board report differences from base aircraft B-737-800 to B-737-8. Item closed: The federal aviation administration incorporated the intent of the change as documented in the Flight Standardization Board report appendix 3 Differences Tables/Design airline transport association 22 automatic flight. The Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG) (now Aircraft Evaluation Division (AED)) to discuss with CMT and other stakeholders to consider incorporating Indicated Airspeed DISAGREE and Angle of Attack DISAGREE into Airspeed Unreliable Checklist so that it is titled "Airspeed Unreliable or Indicated Airspeed DISAGREE or Angle of Attack DISAGREE”, similar to the B747 checklist. Item closed: The Technical Advisory Board concluded that with the enhanced training package, pilots will be able to successfully complete the separate Indicated Airspeed DISAGREE and Angle of Attack DISAGREE NNCs. This was also validated in the Joint Operations Evaluation Board activity and supported by B737NG service history. The Technical Advisory Board observes that there is a potential for confusion and misunderstanding when QRHs (or other documents) constructed by individual Civil Aviation Authorities or operators differ from the Aircraft Flight Manual. The criteria for relief as to the extent of the customization, and the oversight of the resulting product(s), should be enhanced for Aircraft Flight Manual information that is customized for QRHs and other aircraft documents. 11.2 Service Information The federal aviation administration reviewed and approved the service information (service bulletins) Boeing submitted that contain the design changes that address the unsafe condition and other issues relevant to the matters discussed in this report. The agency has completed review and approved the following service information: Boeing Alert Requirements Bulletin 737 22A1342 RB, dated November 17, 2020, describes procedures for installation of the new Flight Control Computer software. Boeing Special Attention Service Bulletin 737-31-1860, Revision 1 dated July2, 2020, describes procedures for installation of MDS software. Boeing Special Attention Service Bulletin 737-27-1318, Revision 2, dated November 10, 2020, describes procedures for changing of the horizontal stabilizer trim wire routing installations. Boeing Special Attention Service Bulletin 737-00-1028, dated July 20, 2020, describes procedures for an Angle of Attack sensor system test and an operational readiness flight. 11.3 federal aviation administration design change approval In approving Boeing’s service information and the design change, the federal aviation administration required incorporating the change into the manufacturing build of all future 737 MAX airplanes, as well as any future variants of the 737 MAX, unless the federal aviation administration later approves or mandates additional changes. 11.4 Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community The federal aviation administration will issue a Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community for the 737 MAX in anticipation of issuing any Mandatory Continued Airworthiness Information in the form of an federal aviation administration Airworthiness Directive. The Continued Airworthiness Notification to the International Community provides information about the FAA’s Continued Operational Safety activities related to addressing the Lion Air Flight 610 and Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 crashes. 11.5 Notices The federal aviation administration published two notices to federal aviation administration inspectors containing federal aviation administration national policy on minimum required maintenance and training program changes that relate to the 737 MAX design change. 11.6 Airworthiness Directive (AD) To mandate the design changes described in this report for airplanes that have already received a Certificate of Airworthiness or an Export Certificate of Airworthiness, the federal aviation administration issued a new Airworthiness Directive that provides specific instructions about steps an owner or operator must take to address the unsafe condition on the 737 MAX. The Airworthiness Directive does not apply to airplanes still under Boeing’s production-approval system, which have not received an original airworthiness certification. This is because the new design is approved as part of the baseline type-certificated design and incorporates all the changes prior to first flight and approval. The Airworthiness Directive requires the following actions: • Installing new Flight Control Computer OPS software and doing a software installation verification. Revising the existing Aircraft Flight Manual to remove the information from the applicable sections that was required by Airworthiness Directive 2018-23-51, because that information is no longer applicable based on the design changes specified in the new Airworthiness Directive, and to incorporate new and revised information and procedures. The new Airworthiness Directive also requires accomplishment of the: • Boeing Alert Requirements Bulletin 737-22A1342 RB, dated November 17, 2020, describes procedures for installation of Flight Control Computer OPS software on Flight Control Computer A and Flight Control Computer B, a softwareinstallation verification, and corrective actions. • Boeing Special Attention Service Bulletin 737-31-1860, Revision 1, dated July 2, 2020, describes procedures for installation of MDS software, a software installation verification and corrective actions, and removal of certain INOP markers on the EFIS control panels. • Boeing Special Attention Service Bulletin 737-27-1318, Revision 2, dated November 10, 2020, describes procedures for changing of the horizontal stabilizer trim wire routing installations. • Boeing Special Attention Service Bulletin 737-00-1028, dated July 20, 2020, describes procedures for an Angle of Attack sensor system test and an operational readiness flight. In addition, the new Airworthiness Directive will allow dispatch of an airplane with certain inoperative systems only if certain provisions are incorporated in the operator’s existing FAA-approved minimum equipment list (MEL). 12. Recommendations from Independent Panels and Other Investigative Bodies 12.1 National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Safety Recommendations 12.1.1 Description of Activity The national transportation safety board participated in the JT610 and ET302 accident investigations as the U.S. accredited representative. As a part of its responsibilities, the Board issued safety recommendations to the FAA, based on evidence and conclusions from investigative activities. On September 26, 2019, the Board issued seven safety recommendations, A-19-010 through A-19-016. The federal aviation administration has reviewed each response in relation to the 737 MAX and its readiness for return to service; however, the federal aviation administration will provide responses to the national transportation safety board recommendations through its established processes for responding to such recommendations. The following sections provide federal aviation administration commentary on how each safety recommendation affects this airplane’s return to service, and actions taken to address the identified concerns. 12.1.2 Recommendations A-19-013 Develop robust tools and methods, with the input of industry and human factors experts, for use in validating assumptions about pilot recognition and response to safety-significant failure conditions as part of the design certification process Please refer to federal aviation administration Comment on recommendation A-19-016. A-19-014 Once the tools and methods have been developed as recommended in Recommendation A-19-13, revise existing Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations and guidance to incorporate their use and documentation as part of the design certification process, including re-examining the validity of pilot recognition and response assumptions permitted in existing federal aviation administration guidance. Please refer to federal aviation administration Comment on recommendation A-19-016. A-19-015 Develop design standards, with the input of industry and human factors experts, for aircraft system diagnostic tools that improve the prioritization and clarity of failure indications (direct and indirect) presented to pilots to improve the timeliness and effectiveness of their response Please refer to federal aviation administration Comment on recommendation A-19-016. A-19-016 Once the design standards have been developed as recommended in Recommendation A-19-15, require implementation of system diagnostic tools on transport-category aircraft to improve the timeliness and effectiveness of pilots’ response when multiple flight deck alerts and indications are present Safety recommendations A-19-013 through A-19-016 apply to developing new tools and methodologies for validating assumptions about pilot recognition and response to safety-significant failure conditions, with associated updates to regulations and policy as necessary. The federal aviation administration will consider all similar recommendations in formulating an overarching plan for research and possible updates to the agency’s regulations, policy and guidance. 12.2 Joint Authorities Technical Review (JATR) Submittal 12.2.1 Description of Activity The federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Aviation Safety established the Joint Authority Technical Review to review the type certification of the flight control system on the 737 MAX. The Joint Authority Technical Review was chaired by Christopher Hart, an independent aviation safety professional and former Chairman of the NTSB. The remainder of the Joint Authority Technical Review team was comprised of 28 members from the FAA, NASA, and nine Civil Aviation Authorities representing Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, the European Union, Indonesia, Japan, Singapore and the United Arab Emirates. The federal aviation administration chartered the Joint Authority Technical Review to review the work conducted during the 737 MAX certification program to assess whether compliance was shown with the required applicable airworthiness standards related to the flight control system and its interfaces, and to recommend improvements to the certification process if warranted. Of particular concern to the federal aviation administration in chartering the Joint Authority Technical Review was the function, evaluation and certification of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function on the 737 MAX. The Joint Authority Technical Review team also focused on flight crew training and operational suitability of the design. The Joint Authority Technical Review team considered whether the appropriate regulations and policies were applied, as well as how applicable regulations and policy material could be improved to enhance safety. 12.2.2 Recommendations Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the application of the Changed Product Rules to the certification of the flight control system of the 737 MAX, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration work with other civil aviation authorities to revise the harmonized approach to the certification of changed products. Changed Product Rules (e.g., 14 code of federal regulations §§ 21.19 and 21.101) and associated guidance (e.g., Advisory Circular 21.101-1B and federal aviation administration Orders 8110.4C and 8110.48A) should be revised to require a top-down approach, whereby every change is evaluated from an integrated whole-aircraft system perspective. These revisions should include criteria for determining when core attributes of an existing transport category aircraft design make it incapable of supporting the safety advancements introduced by the latest regulations and should drive a design change or a need for a new type certificate. The aircraft system includes the aircraft itself with all its subsystems, the flight crew, and the maintenance crew. These Changed Product Rule revisions should take into consideration the following key principles: A comprehensive integrated system-level analysis recognizing that in this complex interactive system, every change could interact with other parts of the system. The assessment of proposed design changes on existing systems at the aircraft level includes using Development Assurance principles, system safety principles, and validation and verification techniques. The level of assessment should be proportional to the impact of the change at the aircraft level. The consideration of training and qualification of flight and maintenance personnel, as well as detailed explicit procedures for the safe operation of the aircraft. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. In relation to the FAA’s approval of Boeing’s 737 MAX current design changes, the agency’s analysis included extensive evaluation of the integrated System Safety Analyses, including interaction between systems, a thorough review of design assurance processes, and a detailed examination and testing for appropriate training requirements. 2 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the regulations, policy, and compliance methods applied to the 737 MAX, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration update regulations and guidance that are out of date and update certification procedures to ensure that the applied requirements, issue papers, means of compliance, and policies fully address the safety issues related to state-of-the-art designs employed on new projects. Joint Authority Technical Review team members also recommend that the federal aviation administration review its processes to ensure that regulations and guidance materials are kept up to date. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. 3 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the certification of the 737 MAX flight control system and related interfaces, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration review the 737 MAX compliance with 14 code of federal regulations 25.1329 (Flight Guidance System), 25.1581 (Airplane Flight Manual – General), and 25.201 (Stall Demonstration) and ensure the consistent application and interpretation of regulatory guidance material for the system safety assessment, handling qualities rating method, and conformity requirements for engineering simulators and devices. Should there be a non-compliance, the root cause should be identified and measures implemented to prevent recurrence. The FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive evaluation of 737 MAX compliance to 14 code of federal regulations 25.1329 (Flight Guidance System), 25.1581 (Airplane Flight Manual – General), and 25.201 (Stall Demonstration). Analysis and tests were conducted on Flight Control Computer software changes, procedural changes included in the Aircraft Flight Manual and in addition, flight testing for stall characteristics. The federal aviation administration routinely reviews application of technical policy and will review compliance issues with these regulations to determine whether regulatory and policy changes are required. 4 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the federal aviation administration type certification process, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration review and update guidance pertaining to the type certification process with particular emphasis on early federal aviation administration involvement to ensure the federal aviation administration is aware of all design assumptions, the aircraft design, and all changes to the design in cases where a changed product process is used. The federal aviation administration should consider adding feedback paths in the process to ensure that compliance, system safety, and flight deck/human factors aspects are considered for the aircraft design throughout its development and certification. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. In relation to federal aviation administration approval of the 737 MAX current design changes, Boeing involved the federal aviation administration from the beginning of the design-change effort and the federal aviation administration did not delegate any compliance findings to the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization (ODA). In addition, the federal aviation administration supplemented Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office resources with staff from other offices within the federal aviation administration to accomplish the depth of review. 5 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the FAA’s oversight by the Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration conduct a workforce review of the Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office engineer staffing level to ensure there is a sufficient number of experienced specialists to adequately perform certification and oversight duties, commensurate with the extent of work being performed by Boeing. The workforce levels should be such that decisions to retain responsibility for finding compliance are not constrained by a lack of experienced engineers. The federal aviation administration should review the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization work environment and Organization Designation Authorization manual to ensure the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization engineering unit members (E-UMs) are working without any undue pressure when they are making decisions on behalf of the FAA. This review should include ensuring the Engineering Unit Members have open lines of communication to federal aviation administration certification engineers without fear of punitive action or process violation. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research by the newly established Organization Designation Authorization Office under the FAA’s Office of Aviation Safety (AVS). In relation to the FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes, the federal aviation administration delegated no compliance findings to the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization. In addition, the federal aviation administration supplemented Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office resources with staff from other offices within the FAA. The additional resources compliment and expand the 737 MAX project team’s knowledge, skills and abilities relative to Boeing’s design change. 6 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the design process of the flight control system and the related system safety assessments for the 737 MAX, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration promote a safety culture that drives a primary focus on the creation of safe products, which in turn comply with certification requirements. Aircraft functions should be assessed, not in an incremental and fragmented manner, but holistically at the aircraft level. System function and performance, including the effects of failures, should be demonstrated and associated assumptions should be challenged to ensure robust designs are realized. The safety analysis process should be integrated with the aircraft Development Assurance process to ensure all safety requirements and associated assumptions are correct, complete, and verified. The federal aviation administration should encourage applicants to have a system safety function that is independent from the design organization, with the authority to impartially assess aircraft safety and influence the aircraft/system design details. Adoption of a safety management system is one way this can be achieved. This recommendation is for future changes to Boeing and federal aviation administration interaction policy and will require research and coordination. In relation to FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes, the federal aviation administration addressed the impact of the Joint Authority Technical Review findings by implementing a higher degree of involvement in the design change evaluation and did not delegate any compliance findings to the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization. 7 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to human factors-related issues in the certification process, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration integrate and emphasize human factors and human system integration throughout its certification process. Human factors-relevant policies and guidance should be expanded and clarified, and compliance with such regulatory requirements as 14 code of federal regulations §§ 25.1302 (Installed Systems and Equipment for Use by the Flight crew), 25.1309 (Equipment, Systems, and Installations), and 25.1322 (Flight crew Alerting) should be thoroughly verified and documented. To enable the thorough analysis and verification of compliance, the federal aviation administration should expand its aircraft certification resources in human factors and in human system integration. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. The FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive evaluation of documentation and compliance to 14 code of federal regulations §§ 25.1302 (Installed Systems and Equipment for Use by the Flight crew), 25.1309 (Equipment, Systems, and Installations), and 25.1322 (Flight crew Alerting). The federal aviation administration assigned human factors specialists to the Technical Advisory Board from outside the agency to help evaluate human factors of the design change. 8 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s observations and findings related to the Development Assurance process applied to the design of the flight control system of the 737 MAX, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration ensure applicants apply industry best practices for development assurance, including requirements management, visibility of assumptions, process assurance activities, and configuration management. The federal aviation administration should ensure achievement of the close coupling that is required between the applicant safety analysis process and the Development Assurance process to classify failure conditions and derive the level of rigor of design development and verification. A current example of an industry best practice is society of automotive engineers International’s Aerospace Recommended Practice 4754A (ARP4754A). The federal aviation administration should review and amend Advisory Circular 20-174 to clearly articulate the principles of Aerospace Recommended Practice4754A, promoting industry best practice for Development Assurance of aircraft and aircraft systems to address applicants’ design trend of increasing integration between aircraft functions and systems. Consistent with the Technical Advisory Board recommendation, a joint audit was conducted on the initial software development process, and on the final production Flight Control Computer software, by the federal aviation administration and EASA. The FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive evaluation of the company’s Development Assurance process applied to the design of the flight control system, including requirements management, visibility of assumptions, process assurance activities, and configuration management. Process improvements based on lessons learned would support future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. 9 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s findings and observations related to the operational design assumptions of crew response applied during the certification process for the flight control system of the 737 MAX, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration require the integration of certification and operational functions during the certification process. The federal aviation administration should be provided all system differences between related aircraft in order to adequately evaluate operational impact, systems integration, and human performance. This recommendation is for future operational evaluation policy changes and will require research and coordination between federal aviation administration organizations. The FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive coordination with senior leadership from offices responsible for continued airworthiness, certification of the design change, and operational evaluation. 10 Based on the Joint Authority Technical Review team’s findings and observations related to flight crew training, Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration require a documented process to determine what information will be included in the Aircraft Flight Manual, the Flight crew Operating Manual, and the Flight crew Training Manual (FCTM). The federal aviation administration should review training programs to ensure flight crews are competent in the handling of mistrim events. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other civil aviation authorities. In relation to the FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes, the FAA’s certification offices and operational evaluation offices conducted extensive analysis and testing, including the Joint Operations Evaluation Board process to determine adequacy of the Aircraft Flight Manual and Flight crew Training Manual content. All affected procedures (checklists) were included in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 11 Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration conduct a study to determine the adequacy of policy, guidance, and assumptions related to maintenance and ground handling training requirements. This recommendation is for future maintenance and ground handling policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. 12 Joint Authority Technical Review team members recommend that the federal aviation administration review its policies for analysing safety risk and implementing interim Airworthiness Directive action following a fatal transport aircraft accident. The federal aviation administration should ensure that it shares post-accident safety information with the international community to the maximum extent possible. This recommendation is for future continued airworthiness policy changes and will require research and coordination with other civil aviation authorities. The federal aviation administration recognizes the value of sharing information with the international community, by evidence of this report. 12.3 JT610 Final Accident Report 12.3.1 Description of Activity On October 25, 2019, the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee released the final report for PT. Lion Mentari Airlines Boeing 737 MAX; PK-LQP, also known as Flight JT610 in this document. The report is based on the investigation the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee conducted in accordance with Annex 13 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, the Indonesian Aviation Act (UU No. 1/2009) and Government Regulation (PP No. 62/2013). The federal aviation administration and Boeing supplied technical advisors to the NTSB, which assisted the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee. The Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee final report documents a comprehensive investigation that probed circumstances that led to the accident, including airplane design, certification, operations and maintenance. Other areas reviewed include component repair and oversight, air traffic control, pilot training and airline safety programs. The Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee report includes safety recommendations for several groups. This report includes all Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommendations for Boeing, Xtra Aerospace and the FAA. The federal aviation administration notes, however, that the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee final report includes a wide range of recommendations for air traffic, operations, maintenance and others. The federal aviation administration did not address recommendations outside of the aircraft design and related training, maintenance and operational documents. However, the federal aviation administration believes those recommendations should be addressed by the appropriate organizations, outside of the effort addressed in this report. 12.3.2 Recommendations 04.O-2018-35.10 Xtra Aerospace After Xtra Aerospace repair of the accident Angle of Attack sensor in November of 2017, the sensor was installed on the PK-LQP aircraft on left side position during the maintenance activity in Denpasar on October 28, 2018. On the subsequent flight, a 21-degree difference between left and right Angle of Attack sensors was recorded on the digital flight data recorder (DFDR), commencing shortly after the takeoff roll was initiated. This immediate 21- degree delta indicated that the Angle of Attack sensor was most likely improperly calibrated at Xtra. As noted, utilization of the Peak Model SRI-201B API by Xtra Aerospace for the test and calibration of the 0861FL1 Angle of Attack sensor should have required a written procedure to specify the proper position of the REL/ABS switch. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends emphasizing the implementation of a company manual including equivalency assessment, training and written procedure, to ensure component being repaired are properly maintained. On October 24, 2019, the federal aviation administration revoked Xtra’s Title 14 code of federal regulations part 145 Air Agency certificate. The federal aviation administration primarily based the revocation on the fact that after performing maintenance, Xtra systemically approved articles for return to service when some of the articles were not listed on its capability list. Xtra did so without conducting self-evaluations to determine whether it had the appropriate and equivalent test equipment/tooling capability. 04.R-2018-35.11 Boeing During flight JT610, multiple alerts and indications occurred, which increased the flight crew’s workload. This obscured the problem, and the flight crew could not arrive at a solution during the initial or subsequent automatic AND stabilizer trim input, such as performing the runaway stabilizer procedure or continuing to use electric trim to reduce column forces and maintain level flight. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that the aircraft manufacturer consider the effect of all possible flight deck alerts and indications on flight crew recognition and response; and incorporate design, flight crew procedures, and/or training requirements where needed to minimize the potential for flight crew actions that are inconsistent with manufacturer assumptions. Development and certification activity to return the 737 MAX to service addressed this recommendation. Boeing proposed design changes and worked with the federal aviation administration to assess and revise flight deck alerts, flight-crew responses, procedures, and training consistent with this Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommendation. 04.R-2018-35.12 Boeing During certification phase, flight test pilots, who normally have exceptional skill and experience, are used to demonstrate compliance. Flight test pilots generally have more knowledge about the aircraft design characteristics than normal pilots do. Flight test pilots however, are trained to replicate the average flight crew. The Aircraft Evaluation Group pilots, who have an operational flying background, also evaluate the aircraft during the certification phase. These pilots establish the pilot type rating, training, checking and currency requirements as part of the Flight Standardization Board (FSB) process. The Flight Standardization Board process also utilizes airline line pilots to help ensure the requirements are operationally representative. The federal aviation administration and OEMs should re-evaluate their assumptions for what constitutes an average flight crew’s basic skill and what level of systems knowledge a ‘properly trained average flight crew’ has when encountering failures. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that Boeing include a larger tolerance in the design is required to allow operability by a larger population of flight-rated pilots. Development and certification activity to return the 737MAX to service addressed this recommendation. Boeing was mindful during the redesign of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and associated systems that new design must not require exceptional pilot skills or capabilities. The criteria has not changed, but the new Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design allows for a wide range of piloting techniques (e.g. short vs. long duration trim inputs). Rather than relying on crew procedures, the new design is such that the need for using the Stabilizer Runaway Non-Normal Checklist will be extremely improbable. The procedure still exists but should never be needed. 04.M-2018-35.13 Boeing During the accident flight, the Digital Flight Data Recorder recorded a control force of 103 lbs., after repetitive Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation was responded to by the First Office with inadequate trim to counter Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. At this point, the flight crew was unable to maintain altitude. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that Boeing and the federal aviation administration more closely scrutinize the development and certification process for systems whose malfunction has the ability to lead to loss of control of the airplane. Development and certification activity to return the 737 MAX to service addressed this recommendation. The redesigned Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will not be prone to either erroneous or repeat activations. Furthermore, the design limits the magnitude of an Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command, so the pilot retains sufficient elevator control to counter the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System-generated stabilizer input based on flight conditions. 04.M-2018-35.14 Boeing The flight crew should have been provided with information and alerts to help them understand the system and know how to resolve potential issues. Flight crew procedures and training should be appropriate. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that Boeing develop guidance for the criteria of information that should be included in flight crews and engineer’s manuals. This recommendation is specific to the development of guidance. The guidance is not required for Return to Service. For the Return to Service certification review, the federal aviation administration was actively involved in determining the information that would be included in flight crew and engineer manuals. 04.R-2018-35.15 Boeing The aircraft should have included the intended Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message functionally, which was installed on 737 NG aircraft. Boeing and the federal aviation administration should ensure that new and changed aircraft design are properly described, analysed, and certified. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends to Boeing that they ensure that certified and delivered airplanes have intended system functionality. Development and certification activity to address the safety issues on the 737 MAX addressed this recommendation. The Angle of Attack DISAGREE message will be basic and functional on all 737 MAX airplanes as they return to service. 04.R-2018-35.16 Boeing The Interactive Fault Isolation Manual tasks of “ALT DISAGREE” and “Indicated Airspeed DISAGREE” are duplicated on the leak test in step (3) and (4) as they are referring to the same Airplane Maintenance Manual tasks. This repetition was inefficient and did not contribute to problem solving. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends the Interactive Fault Isolation Manual tasks sequence are reviewed to ensure they are effective. Development and certification activity to address the safety issues on the 737 MAX addressed this recommendation. The Interactive Fault Isolation Manual document was reviewed/revised on November 15, 2019 to remove the repetitive tasks. 04.R-2018-35.20 federal aviation administration In the accident flight, the system malfunction led to erroneous information that initiated a series of events that were not correctly recognized and responded to by the flight crew. This exposed issues that were not identified if Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) 25.1302 and 25.1309 were each considered separately. There could be a potential gap between the two requirements when system malfunction is followed by crew fallibility. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that federal aviation administration review the requirements of the applicable FARs to consider any issue that may be overlooked when the requirements are considered separately. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other civil aviation authorities. Development and certification activity to address the safety issues of the 737 MAX addressed this recommendation. The FAA’s review of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive evaluation of documentation and compliance with 14 code of federal regulations §§ 25.1302 (Installed Systems and Equipment for Use by the Flight crew), 25.1309 (Equipment, Systems, and Installations), and 25.1322 (Flight crew Alerting). The federal aviation administration assigned human factors specialists to the Technical Advisory Board from outside the agency to help evaluate human factors of the design change. 04.R-2018-35.21 federal aviation administration In the accident flight, the system malfunction led to a series of aircraft and flight crew interactions which the flight crew did not understand or know how to resolve. It is the pilot response assumptions in the initial design process which, coupled with the repetitive Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activations, turned out to be incorrect and inconsistent with the Functional Hazard Assessment classification of Major. Therefore, the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that the federal aviation administration review their processes for determining their level of involvement (degree of delegation) and how changes in the design are communicated to the federal aviation administration to ensure an appropriate level of review. This recommendation is for future Boeing and federal aviation administration interaction policy changes and will require research and coordination. In relation to the FAA’s review of the 737 MAX current design changes, the federal aviation administration addressed the impact of these recommendations by implementing a higher degree of involvement in the design change evaluation and did not delegate any compliance findings to the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization. 04.R-2018-35.22 federal aviation administration The absence of equivalency assessment required by Xtra Aerospace procedure and unavailability of procedure was not detected by the FAA. This indicated inadequacy of federal aviation administration oversight. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that federal aviation administration improve the oversight of Approved Maintenance Organization (AMO) to ensure the processes within the Approved Maintenance Organization are conducted in accordance with the requirements. This recommendation is for future maintenance and ground-handling policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. The federal aviation administration addressed relevant activity at Xtra Aerospace in a separate action from its activities to address the safety issues on the 737 MAX. 04.R-2018-35.23 federal aviation administration During the accident flight, the Digital Flight Data Recorder recorded a control force of 103 lbs., after repetitive Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation was responded to by the First Officer with inadequate trim to counter Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. At this point, the flight crew was unable to maintain altitude. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that Boeing and the federal aviation administration more closely scrutinize the development and certification process for systems whose malfunction has the ability to lead to loss of control of the airplane. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. The FAA’s review of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive evaluation of documentation and compliance with 14 code of federal regulations §§ 25.1302 (Installed Systems and Equipment for Use by the Flight crew), 25.1309 (Equipment, Systems, and Installations), and 25.1322 (Flight crew Alerting). The federal aviation administration assigned human factors specialists to the Technical Advisory Board from outside the agency to help evaluate human factors of the design change. 04.R-2018-35.24 federal aviation administration During the accident and previous LNI043 flights, the flight crew initially responded in the same way, by pulling back on the control column. However, they did not consistently trim out the resulting column forces as had been assumed. As a result Boeing’s assumption regarding pilot behaviour and reaction time was different from the pilot behaviour and reaction time in responding to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. Therefore, the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends that the federal aviation administration work with international regulatory authorities to review assumptions on pilot behaviour used during design and revise certification processes to ensure assumptions used during the design process are validated. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. The FAA’s review of the 737 MAX current design changes included extensive evaluation of documentation and compliance to 14 code of federal regulations §§ 25.1302 (Installed Systems and Equipment for Use by the Flight crew), 25.1309 (Equipment, Systems, and Installations), and 25.1322 (Flight crew Alerting). The federal aviation administration assigned human factors specialists to the Technical Advisory Board from outside the agency to help evaluate human factors of the design change. 04.R-2018-35.25 federal aviation administration The flight crew should have been provided with information and alerts to help them understand the system and know how to resolve potential issues. Flight crew procedures and training should be appropriate. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends to the federal aviation administration work with international regulatory authorities to review the guidance for the criteria of information which should be included in flight crew and engineer‘s manuals. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. In relation to the FAA’s review of the current design changes, the FAA’s certification offices and operational evaluation offices conducted extensive analysis and tests, and used the Joint Operations Evaluation Board process to determine adequacy of the Aircraft Flight Manual and Flight crew Training Manual content. All affected procedures (checklists), changed or unchanged, are included in the Aircraft Flight Manual. 04.R-2018-35.26 federal aviation administration The aircraft should have included the intended Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message functionally, which was installed on 737 NG aircraft. Boeing and the federal aviation administration should ensure that new and changed aircraft design are properly described, analysed, and certified. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends to Boeing and the federal aviation administration that they ensure that certified and delivered airplanes have intended system functionality The current design change for the 737MAX requires installation of an update Multi-Function Display software to assure Angle of Attack DISAGREE annunciation logic has been updated to maintain commonality between the 737 NG and the 737 MAX families of aircraft. 04.R-2018-35.27 federal aviation administration The aircraft was equipped with an airframe-mounted low frequency Underwater Locator Beacon (ULB) which operated at a frequency of 8.8 kHz. The beacon is included in international civil aviation organization standards. The purpose of the beacon is to airport information desk in the location of submerged aircraft. During the search phase, multiple surveys were conducted to detect a signal at 8.8 kHz, however no such signals were detected in the area where wreckage was recovered. The beacon was mounted on the forward side of the nose pressure bulkhead. Most of the preferred installation locations could not be used because they proved to be incompatible with european union aviation safety agency and federal aviation administration Non-Rechargeable Lithium Battery certification requirements or they did not meet the international civil aviation organization empennage and wings exclusion. Therefore, Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommends to the federal aviation administration work with international regulatory authorities to review the requirements for installation of Non-Rechargeable Lithium Battery certification requirements. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. Notable Entry (Not a Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee recommendation) In section 1.16.1 Installation Test Angle of Attack Sensor with Known Bias, the Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee investigated the adequacy of the Angle of Attack Sensor installation instructions. “On 15 November 2018, with approval from Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee and under the direction and supervision of the NTSB, Boeing and the national transportation safety board conducted an installation test of an Angle of Attack sensor on an exemplar of the 737 MAX located at the Boeing Field Flight Line. This test was intended to demonstrate if the Airplane Maintenance Manual installation test, task 34-21-05-400-801, was robust enough to ensure that a bias in an Angle of Attack sensor could be identified/detected using the installation and alternate test procedure. The tests conducted as follow: 1. The tests were conducted on a production 737 MAX aircraft in serviceable condition inside a hangar with adequate lighting. 2. The first test consisted of installing a known serviceable Angle of Attack sensor in the left position of the aircraft on the production aircraft. 3. The second test consisted of installing an Angle of Attack sensor with an induced or known bias of approximately 33° (modified to have 33° bias) in the left position of the aircraft. 4. The tests were done with and without entering good weight data into the flight management computer. Conclusion: 1. With the serviceable (original) Angle of Attack sensor installed on the aircraft, the results of the alternative installation test indicated that the left Angle of Attack sensor met the Airplane Maintenance Manual requirements. 2.With the biased Angle of Attack sensor, the test found that the vane angle values exceed the limits as follows: a. when the vane was at its zero position, the SMYD displayed -31.9° (the misalignment angle) instead of 0° ± 5° b. When the vane positioned at its maximum upper stop, the SMYD displayed +67.6° instead of +100° ± 5°. c. When the vane positioned at its maximum lower stop, the SMYD displayed the text “Angle of Attack SENSR INVALID”. 3.3. The alternative method of the installation test in the Airplane Maintenance Manual will successfully detect a mis-calibrated Angle of Attack sensor.” The federal aviation administration reviewed the results of this test of the adequacy of the Angle of Attack Sensor installation instructions and determined the existing Airplane Maintenance Manual instructions are satisfactory and require no change. As part of the return to service activity the federal aviation administration expects that it will require that Angle of Attack Sensor installation checks be conducted on all 737 MAX aircraft. 12.4 U.S. Department of Transportation Special Committee 12.4.1 Description of Activity In April 2019, U.S. Secretary of Transportation Elaine L. Chao created the Special Committee to Review the Federal Aviation Administration’s Aircraft Certification Process (the Committee). The Committee was commissioned as an independent panel of aviation and safety experts to conduct an objective review of the FAA’s procedures for product certification and the processes the federal aviation administration and Boeing followed during the certification of the 737 MAX. The Committee was instructed to review the certification process, evaluate potential enhancements to the system, and make recommendations to bolster aviation safety. 12.4.2 Recommendations 1-Safety Management Systems Safety Management Systems (SMS) help to ensure a holistic, proactive assessment of whether the combination of design, procedures, and training will support effective safety performance. There is no requirement for Safety Management System for design and manufacturing organizations. The federal aviation administration currently requires an Safety Management System only for part 121 operators. The federal aviation administration must mandate implementation of Safety Management System for design and manufacturing organizations, thereby ensuring connection and interrelationship with the existing SMSs of airlines, airports, and service providers. The federal aviation administration should take the necessary steps to ensure a total system approach to safety, linking all safety requirements from type certification to pilot training, and operational performance of the product. The federal aviation administration should encourage the integration of Partnership for Safety Plan PSP, Safety Management System, and Organization Designation Authorization activities to create an effective oversight process to better manage safety and certification issues. This recommendation is for future Safety Management System policy changes. The federal aviation administration encourages and recognizes voluntary Safety Management System programs for manufacturers. The federal aviation administration has initiated a rulemaking effort to require manufacturers to have an Safety Management System program. 2-System Safety SSAs are an essential component of safety risk management that can be expanded to better consider human–machine interaction. The federal aviation administration and industry should review requirements and guidance materials to promote more consistent use of systematic analysis of Human Performance and Error Assessments to complement SSAs in aircraft certification. The federal aviation administration should consider removing exclusions for skill-related errors associated with manual control of the airplane and ensure crew interaction with automated systems active in manual flight are systematically assessed. Current guidelines recommend that human factors be considered when the system is new or novel, complex and/or integrated. In the future, the federal aviation administration should enhance standards to ensure that systematic human factor analyses are conducted for all safety-critical functions and failure modes associated with a change under the changed product rule (14 code of federal regulations § 21.101). Test and evaluation should include multiple failure mode scenarios and involve trained pilots who reflect the anticipated end-users of the product. Resulting data should be fed back into the overall safety assessment of the total system. Significant changes to safety assumptions or performance levels should be tracked. A summary document explaining system safety analysis assumptions and conclusions relevant to safe operation should be communicated throughout the development process and to end-users of the product as reference data for an operator’s Safety Management System program. End users should be required to monitor leading indicators to validate the assumptions of the system safety analysis once the product enters service. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other Civil Aviation Authorities. In relation to the FAA’s review of the 737 MAX current design changes, the certification effort has included extensive evaluation of the integrated System Safety Analyses including interaction between systems, a thorough review of design assurance processes, and a detailed examination and testing for appropriate training requirements. 3-Globalization Although U.S. products are operating worldwide, the federal aviation administration does not have a means to influence the maintenance and pilot training requirements for U.S. products operating under another civil aviation authority. The federal aviation administration should acknowledge the international profile of operators of U.S. State of Design aircraft and implement the necessary changes for its aircraft certification system to consider differences in operations, training, and oversight across States. Some members of the international community are using the Flight Standardization Board reports intended for U.S. operators as the foundation for their operational programs, which was not their intended purpose. The FAA, therefore, should consider including operational requirements as part of the type certificate in order to better communicate minimum standards and promote advanced training and qualification programs. This would allow transfer of operational and training requirements through the validation process. The federal aviation administration should expand its engagement, policies, technical assistance, and training efforts to foster higher international safety standards and practices for aircraft certification, operations, and maintenance This recommendation is for future international coordination and support of operations and will require research and collaboration with other Civil Aviation Authorities. For the 737 MAX, the federal aviation administration conducted extensive analysis and testing to establish appropriate training requirements. The federal aviation administration provided the Flight Standardization Board report along with all other relevant information to the international community. The agency plans to support its international partners with frequent communications to assure all operators and Civil Aviation Authorities are fully informed 4- Data Aviation safety would be bolstered by better data gathering, targeted analysis of aviation data by experts, and the use of all available data for developing and implementing corrective actions to mitigate risk. Operational data needs to be made available in a single repository for analysis. To this end, the federal aviation administration and industry stakeholders of the certification system should continue to develop a means for expeditious gathering and analysing, and acting on large quantities of operational data and reporting de-identified results to the aviation community, using Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing as an example. The federal aviation administration should propose to international civil aviation organization the sharing of operational data internationally, to enhance safety initiatives. The federal aviation administration should find a way to integrate de-identified and confidential data sources so that the aircraft certification workforce, Flight Standards inspectors and other safety organizations can focus on near-time risk factors as part of their Continued Operational Safety activities. The federal aviation administration should continue working with national aeronautics and space administration to develop an in-time aviation safety management system that can be used both by the regulator and industry. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and development. 5-Coordination between the FAA’s Aircraft Certification Service (AIR) and FAA’s Flight Standards Service (AFX) federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service develops and manages the aircraft certification process, which involves personnel from AFX—a separate organization with its own policies, guidance, leadership, and culture. The potential exists for a disconnect between design and operational requirements. The federal aviation administration should review and clarify the roles and responsibilities of the Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG) (now Aircraft Evaluation Division (AED)) in the product certification process to define objectives, precise engagement, and timing throughout the process. This process should include a review of the working relationship between federal aviation administration Flight Standard Service and federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service to ensure that aircraft evaluation group (now AED) representatives are engaged early enough in the certification process to review operational safety requirements and oversee assessments of design features and assumptions affecting operations. The aircraft evaluation group (now AED) should have sufficient engagement throughout the process to be aware of any design changes that occur after the first certification plan is executed. Clarifications should be reflected in policy and guidance materials, which should also be evaluated to determine which organizations should be responsible for them. This recommendation is for future continuous improvement in the federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service/AED coordination process. The automated external defibrillator has been extensively engaged throughout the 737 MAX Return to Service certification process, as a core team member supporting the Flight crew Operations Testing, and leading the Flight Standardization Board. 6-Personnel The federal aviation administration cannot accommodate the growth and complexity in certification workload without effectively understanding and managing its personnel requirements and influencing cultural changes in the workforce to adapt to the changing nature of the work. Priorities include proper skill identification, skill development, and attracting the right talent. The federal aviation administration should plan an aggressive recruitment campaign to encourage students to pursue careers at the FAA. The federal aviation administration should re-evaluate its current position descriptions and desired skill sets—especially as they relate to covering systems and process knowledge—to ensure that personnel with the right range of skills occupy safety-critical positions so that the agency can meet evolving industry needs. Workforce planning is not just about hiring new people; it is also about filling the gaps between what the federal aviation administration currently has and what it needs and making effective use of current staff. federal aviation administration Aviation Safety should re-evaluate its workforce strategy to ensure it is sufficient to accomplish the federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service transformation and adapt to the ever-changing global aviation industry. This recommendation concerns future personnel program and initiative enhancements. Focus areas include expanded recruiting and workforce development, targeting safety-critical positions, and emphasizing systems thinking. In relation to the 737 MAX safety review effort, the federal aviation administration supplemented Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office resources with experienced staff from other offices within the FAA. The additional resources complement and expand the 737 MAX project team’s knowledge, skills, and abilities relative to Boeing’s design change. 7-Delegation The FAA’s delegation system is an appropriate and effective tool for conducting aircraft certification. It relies on effective standards, oversight, and communication between stakeholders. The aviation community, including the FAA, industry, stakeholders, and Congress, should recognize that the delegation system allows U.S. industry and innovation to thrive, while allocating federal aviation administration resources to derive the greatest safety benefit. The federal aviation administration should continue to make use of the current delegation system, which is solidly established, well controlled, and promotes safety through effective oversight. The federal aviation administration and industry should work together to address concerns about potential undue pressure on an Organization Designation Authorization Unit in order to maintain the independent decision-making structure of the Organization Designation Authorization and ensure that the Organization Designation Authorization fulfils its requirement to serve as a representative of the federal aviation administration Administrator. The federal aviation administration should ensure that its personnel involved in overseeing designees evolve in step with the delegation system. Oversight of a delegated organization is not the same as oversight of a delegated individual, and requires a specific skill set related to systems thinking. A continued focus on change management is needed to empower federal aviation administration staff and enable them to adapt to a changing work landscape. The federal aviation administration should provide clarification and guidance on how and when federal aviation administration technical specialists and Organization Designation Authorization unit members communicate directly regarding technical concerns. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research by the newly established Organization Designation Authorization Office under federal aviation administration Aviation Safety. In relation to the FAA’s approval of the 737 MAX current design changes, the federal aviation administration delegated no compliance findings to the Boeing Organization Designation Authorization. In addition, the federal aviation administration supplemented Boeing Aviation Safety Oversight Office resources with staff from other offices within the FAA. Engineering Unit Members were also involved in the process with the federal aviation administration engineering staff. 8-Amended Type Certificates The federal aviation administration evaluates an application for an amended type certificate using the same structured process as for a new type certificate, and both processes result in certification of a safe product. In fact, the ability to change a Type Certificate is important and promotes an increase in safety for derivative models that replace aging airplanes. The federal aviation administration should work to ensure federal aviation administration policy and guidance are updated to include cross-system (equipment, human, and environment) evaluation of changes. The federal aviation administration should update existing guidance to highlight the vulnerabilities that can develop around multiple adaptations of existing systems, where transfer of historical assumptions may not be appropriate or may require specific validation. This can be relevant to new Type Certificate programs but is more likely relevant to amended Type Certificate programs where system integration can have unique challenges. The federal aviation administration should clarify roles and responsibilities of the applicant and federal aviation administration in assessing cross-functional interface assumptions in determining what constitutes a significant change. This recommendation is for future certification policy changes and will require research and coordination with other civil aviation authorities. In relation to the FAA’s review of the 737 MAX current design changes, the certification effort has included extensive evaluation of the design assurance processes, the integrated system safety analysis including multi-systems interaction and a detailed examination and testing for appropriate training requirements. 9-Innovation federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service focuses its innovation work on guidance materials, standards, and regulations to support new entrants into the aviation market. Since the Innovation Center is a recently adopted concept, federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service should provide guidance expeditiously to both its employees and the industry on how the Center will operate and expectations for success. The Innovation Center must include and encourage review of innovative methods of compliance to previously certified systems. The Innovation Center R&D portfolio should include and prioritize changes to the certification process and regulatory framework so that the FAA’s certifying system can keep up with concepts and technologies in the products it certifies. federal aviation administration should continue implementation of performance-based regulations for the adoption of new technologies that do not stifle future innovations. This recommendation is for future organizational, procedural and policy changes for the federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service Center for Emerging Concepts and Innovation. 13. federal aviation administration Conclusion Following a thorough, transparent and inclusive process, the federal aviation administration determined that Boeing’s changes to the 737 MAX design, flight crew procedures and maintenance procedures effectively mitigate the airplane-related safety issues that contributed to the Flight 610 and Flight 302 accidents. The federal aviation administration further determined that the design change addressed additional safety concerns beyond those identified during the accident investigations. This report does not address other safety issues that might have contributed to the accidents but are not related to airplane design, including maintenance, aircraft operator and air traffic control. The federal aviation administration believes recommendations related to these other potential contributing factors should be addressed by the appropriate organizations. Further, the federal aviation administration evaluated Boeing’s proposed flight crew training through the Flight Standardization Board process. The federal aviation administration issued a final Boeing 737 Flight Standardization Board Report documenting the results of the operational evaluation. 13.1 Safety Issue #1: Use of Single Angle of Attack (Angle of Attack) Sensor In the original design, erroneous data from a single Angle of Attack sensor activated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and subsequently caused airplane nose-down trim of the horizontal stabilizer. In the new design, Boeing eliminated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System reliance on a single Angle of Attack sensor signal by using both Angle of Attack sensor inputs and through flight-control law changes that include safeguards against failed or erroneous Angle of Attack indications. The updated Flight Control Computer software with revised flight-control laws uses inputs from both Angle of Attack sensors to activate Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System. This is in contrast to the original Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System design, which relied on data from only one sensor at a time, and allowed repeated Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation as a result of input from a single Angle of Attack sensor. The updated Flight Control Computer software compares the inputs from the two sensors to detect a failed Angle of Attack sensor. If the difference between the Angle of Attack sensor inputs is above a calculated threshold, the Flight Control Computer will disable the Speed Trim System, including its Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function, for the remainder of that flight and provide a corresponding indication of such deactivation on the flight deck. 13.2 Safety Issue #2: Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Reset Generates Repetitive Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Commands In the original design, when a continuous erroneous high Angle of Attack sensor value existed, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System control law used pilot release of the electric trim switch to reset Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. Once reset, the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System system would make another airplane nose-down stabilizer trim command after five seconds. This scenario would repeat each time the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System made a command and the pilot made an electric trim command of any duration and released the trim switch. In the new design, Boeing included flight-control law changes to ensure that Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System will not command repeated movements of the horizontal stabilizer. The revised flight-control laws allow only one activation of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System per sensed high-Angle of Attack event. A subsequent activation of Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System is only possible after the airplane returns to a low-Angle of Attack state, below the threshold that would cause Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System activation. 13.3 Safety Issue #3 Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Trim Authority In the original design, all Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands were incremental commands, which moved the horizontal stabilizer a fixed amount regardless of the current position of the stabilizer. Therefore, multiple Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System commands resulted in a significant horizontal stabilizer mistrim condition, which the flight crew could not counter using only elevator control. In the new design, Boeing included flight-control law changes that limit the magnitude of any Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command to move the horizontal stabilizer, so that the final horizontal stabilizer position (after the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System command) preserves the flight crew's ability to control the airplane pitch by using only the control column. 13.4 Safety Issue #4 Flight crew Recognition and Response Flight Data Recorder data from both accidents show that the flight crews were unable to effectively manage the stabilizer movement and multiple flight-deck effects that occurred as a result of the single Angle of Attack sensor failure. In the new design, Boeing revised eight non-normal flight crew procedures and proposed additional training. The revised flight crew procedures and pilot training provide the pilot with additional information to recognize erroneous stabilizer movement and the effects of Angle of Attack sensor failures. 13.5 Safety Issue #5 Angle of Attack DISAGREE Message In the originally delivered configuration, the Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message on the Primary Flight Display was not functional unless the airline chose the Angle of Attack indicator option. This alert message is intended to be standard on all 737MAX airplanes. In the new design, Boeing revised the Angle of Attack DISAGREE implementation to maintain the original design intent to be standard on all 737 MAX aircraft. The federal aviation administration is requiring an additional software update that alerts the flight crew to a disagreement between the two Angle of Attack sensors due to a sensor failure or calibration issues. The updated software implements an Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message on all 737 MAX airplanes. While the lack of an Angle of Attack DISAGREE alert message is not an unsafe condition itself, the federal aviation administration is mandating this software update because the flight crew procedures now rely on this alert message to guide flight crew action. 13.6 Safety Issue #6 Other Possible Stabilizer Runaway Failures The federal aviation administration and Boeing conducted a comprehensive review of the integrated system safety analysis of the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System function. This review identified an extremely remote failure condition that required timely pilot intervention to ensure continued safe flight and landing. In the new design, Boeing has implemented a Cross-Flight Control Computer Trim Monitor, which can effectively detect and shut down erroneous stabilizer commands from the Flight Control Computers. This makes continued safe flight and landing for this type of failure not dependent on pilot reaction time. 13.7 Safety Issue #7 Maintenance Procedures Related to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee's final report for Flight JT610 shows several maintenance actions related to repairing and installing a replacement Angle of Attack sensor. “The replacement Angle of Attack sensor that was installed on the accident aircraft had been miscalibrated during an earlier repair. This miscalibration was not detected during the repair. The investigation could not determine whether the Angle of Attack sensor installation test had been performed properly. The miscalibration was not detected.” (Final Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee .18.10.35.04 Aircraft Accident Investigation Report, page 215 linked here). The Collins Component Maintenance Manual for the Angle of Attack sensor has been revised to include a final check intended to prevent a repair shop instrumentation error. The Indonesia’s National Transportation Safety Committee investigation (Reference section 12.3) verified the existing Boeing Airplane Maintenance Manual procedures for Angle of Attack sensor installation will correctly identify a mis-calibrated Angle of Attack sensor. To ensure that each airplane's two Angle of Attack sensors are functioning properly upon return to service, operators will perform Angle of Attack Sensor System Tests on each airplane prior to its return to service. This test uses a fixture to position the Angle of Attack vane and verify that the reading provided by each Angle of Attack sensor is accurate. 13.8 Additional federal aviation administration Considerations As a result of the FAA’s review of the flight-control system of the 737 MAX, the Boeing-proposed design changes, the certification documentation (including the system safety assessment and system description document) and in consideration of systems that are indirectly related to Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System, the federal aviation administration instructed Boeing to address the following: • Mitigate single-point failures of the horizontal stabilizer trim system, • Improve failure monitoring of the Flight Control Computer, flight-control software, and Flight Control Computer signal inputs, • Improve autopilot disengagement during low-speed and/or high-angle of Attack operations, • Reassess the manual trim and determine the system meets federal aviation administration requirements and • Reassess aircraft stall characteristics with Speed Trim System/Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System and Elevator Feel Shift inoperative and determine the aircraft meets federal aviation administration requirements. The federal aviation administration determined that the 737 MAX design changes address the unsafe conditions noted in the accident investigations and enhance the safety of the airplane’s flight-control system architecture, operational procedures and maintenance procedures. Appendix B: Continued Operational Safety Process Details Initial Report The federal aviation administration can receive reports of malfunctions and defects from any source. Typically, the agency receives voluntary information from several avenues, such as accident reports, airlines, and defect reporting. U.S. aircraft companies are required to report to the federal aviation administration all malfunctions and defects that meet regulatory criteria in 14 code of federal regulations 21.3. Subject Matter Expert Assessment Based on the type of problem reported, federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service assigns the report to subject matter experts who have knowledge of the technical disciplines associated with the reported condition. These experts perform a qualitative assessment to determine the urgency of action required. This assessment establishes a critical decision point in their process. Subject matter experts engage in a thorough process that includes research into the possible causes, information exchanges with the aircraft’s designers, and review of historical information. The federal aviation administration includes this assessment in the development of an Airworthiness Directive, which is the tool for requiring mandatory corrective actions. Risk Assessment federal aviation administration specialists identify potential outcomes for the safety issue under review for risk analysis. When appropriate the agency uses product-specific risk analysis methods to calculate the quantitative probability, severity and risk for each outcome to determine the total uncorrected fleet risk and uncorrected individual aircraft risk. If these quantitative risk assessments values exceed federal aviation administration risk guidelines, the agency calculates timelines for corrective action to lower the risk to below the federal aviation administration risk guidelines. Corrective Action Review Board (CARB) Once a risk assessment is completed, the federal aviation administration convenes a Continued Airworthiness Review Board in which federal aviation administration specialists present their recommended actions, along with their risk analysis, causal analysis, and quantitative evaluation of the risk reduction of corrective actions for concurrence. The goal of the Continued Airworthiness Review Board is to improve safety through better decision-making by: • Improving robustness of decision making through a forum in which a board of subject matter experts make key safety decisions. • Providing for cross-functional review, allowing subject matter experts to raise concerns and contribute knowledge about a safety issue and proposed corrective action plan. • Facilitating real-time, open exchange of safety issues across the key lifecycle disciplines. • Providing a forum for the review of the preliminary risk analysis, risk analysis, causal analysis and corrective action(s) for a product type, leading to acceptance, rejection or revision of the proposed corrective action. • Increasing knowledge and experience of the aviation community. Manufacturer Corrective Action Manufacturers typically propose corrective actions when the manufacturer or federal aviation administration identifies safety concerns. Proposals can range from initial interim mitigation to extensive final correction and terminating action. federal aviation administration specialists evaluate each proposed corrective action for its appropriateness and timeliness to mitigate the safety risk. Issue Airworthiness Directive (AD) After the Continued Airworthiness Review Board makes its safety determination that requires corrective action(s), the federal aviation administration issues an Airworthiness Directive. An Airworthiness Directive is a legally enforceable rule that applies to certain products (i.e., aircraft, aircraft engines, propellers, or appliances). Per 14 code of federal regulations § 39.5, the federal aviation administration issues an Airworthiness Directive when (1) an unsafe condition exists in the product and (2), the condition is likely to exist or develop in other products of the same type design.