Title: Aircraft System Safety – Military and Civil Aeronautical Applications – Chapter 1 Author(s): Duane Kritzenger Category: System Safety Tags: Airworthiness, Aircraft, Safety, As a young mechanical engineer in the South African Air Force, I was soon expected to conduct safety assessments on proposed modifications to aircraft. Initially, these assessments were based on the blind application of a limited set of techniques (specifically the FMEA). The task was seldom enjoyable or productive. A few years later, I moved on to evaluating modifications proposed by third parties (e.g., contractors), where it was easy to criticize and demand more from their safety assessments. Again, I found that efficiency was not the order of the day and that the final results were considered little more than dust-gathering tombs of data, which soon became outdated as they did not keep pace with the system’s configuration. After thirteen adventurous years in the Air Force, I joined the private sector. I had now come full circle, whereupon I was once again faced with the other side of the coin. Now, my safety assessments were to be scrutinized by military authorities (i.e., those in my old role), as well as the civil authorities (e.g., CAA, FAA, etc.). It was time for me to find a better, more consistent way of assessing safety and reporting on such an assessment. The fundamental concerns I had included: stakeholder expectations (e.g. what is expected from a safety case or an FMEA) – especially when combining military and civil approaches (e.g. a civil design organisation modifying a military aircraft, or vice versa) terminology and definitions (e.g. distinguishing between a hazard and a failure) safety criteria (i.e. objective targets which can be given to a responsible party to achieve or monitor) auditability (i.e. recording the safety argument, evidence and decisions) practical use (i.e. the safety assessment/case should not only be used to evaluate risks, but should be useful throughout the product lifecycle – from evaluating a design, to assisting in fault diagnoses during operational use) system integration (i.e. efficiently conducting and integrating sub-system safety assessments into a system safety assessment/case)∑presentation (i.e. how to argue the integrity of the systems (and the assessment) though the compilation of previously disparate documents). Starting from the principle that there is no one correct way of doing a safety assessment, I nevertheless endeavored to compile my own ‘user guide’ (from which I could ‘cut-and-paste’ definitions, approaches, templates, etc.) that would assist me in delivering consistently high-quality safety assessments efficiently. As a Principal Safety and Certification Engineer, I was also expected to assist/ train/educate fellow engineers to conduct safety assessments on a variety of modifications. I found this user guide particularly useful in this regard, and the lessons learned (from our struggles) I plough1 back into this ‘user guide’ so as to make the whole process more efficient and effective the next time round. It was during one of these learning cycles that a young engineer remarked, ‘I wish we had this information at university when they tried to teach us this’ when the idea was instilled to compile a textbook that could be used for just such a purpose. The objective of this book is to address the bulleted points above. It does not provide templates of how to apply specific tools or techniques (this may be presented in the next book, who knows). Safety has always been of paramount concern to the aerospace industry, and it has been a leading sector in the take-up of new and increasingly sophisticated methods for assessing acceptable levels of safety. The methods described in this book are those considered appropriate for the development of large transport aircraft systems, two but any industrial sector producing complex and potentially hazardous systems would need something similar. A wealth of ideas, concepts, tools, and approaches from various and diverse sources and industries have been drawn on in this book in an attempt to concisely bring the theory of safety together in a useful reference guide. Although this subject area is very dynamic and constantly evolving, there are some basic elements that form the foundation for its understanding. It is hoped that those who are concerned with safety assessments (i.e., students, designers, safety assessors and their managers, customers, etc.) will be assisted in appreciating the context, value, and limitations of the concepts introduced and, if nothing else, will lead people to ask the right questions. This book would never have existed without the experience I received from my time of employment at the South African Air Force and Marshall Aerospace of Cambridge. I will be forever grateful for the breadth of exposure I received from working on a variety of aircraft platforms (i.e. fixed- and rotor-wing, military and civil aircraft, transport and fast jets, manned and unmanned); international certification authorities (military and civil); a variety of programs (i.e. structural and avionic); as well as the interesting and knowledgeable individuals I have met along the way. I cannot begin to thank adequately those who helped in the preparation of this book. A special thank you to my friends and colleagues who kindly volunteered to review and provide valuable new insights for the theories I was trying to convey: Bernie Guignard (Ch. 1), Doug Henderson (Ch. 10), Grayhame Fish (Ch. 1), Ian Roberts (Fig. 8.8), Iya Solodilova (Fig. 8.8 and Appendix A), Jim Watts (Chs 8 and 9), Stephen Goldsmith (Chs 1 to 12), Richard Ehlers (Chs 3 and 6) and Vic Owen (Chs 2, 4 and 6). I am also grateful for the illustration assistance provided by Adam Cundick (front cover photo), Dave security and hazardous materials safety (Fig. 8.8), and Simon Parker (Fig. 5.2). I have learned a lot from seminars, conferences, journals, papers, and the books of others. All those whom I have cited in the text have their relevant works listed in the references at the end. I am especially indebted to Ted Lloyd and Walter Tye for their ground-breaking book Systematic Safety, which was first published in 1982 and remains an invaluable point of reference for anyone attempting to assess the safety of an aircraft system. I am grateful for the constructive criticism and tactful suggestions made by Woodhead Publishing’s independent reviewers, as well as my airworthiness consultant friends Brian Perry (civil) and Jan Schutte (military), who provided invaluable comments, corrections, suggestions, and improvements. It is my sincere hope that they will all approve of the final result. I acknowledge with thanks the permission I have been given to reproduce the following copyright material: Fig. 13.1 from Boeing; Fig. 13.2 from Doug Arbuckle (NASA); Fig. 6.1 from Lockheed Martin; Fig. 8.1 from Barry de Beer (South African Department of Defence); and to Captain Robert Eijkelkamp (from the Royal Netherlands Airforce) for the front cover photo (taken by Fotovlucht Soesterberg). I would also like to thank the following personnel at Woodhead Publishing Limited for the quality of support, advice, feedback, and assistance during the transformation of my manuscript into this publication: Sheril Leich (Commissioning Editor), Emma Pearce (Project Editor), and Stuart Macfarlane (Production Services). Above all, it was my best friend, sternest critic, biggest fan, and loving wife, Nicole, who encouraged me to persevere and who has been a careful reader of the manuscript and a contributor to its final form and content. All individuals want to be free from harm, whatever the cause. But perfect safety is rare because almost every activity has its dangers. Accidents can and do happen. Sooner or later, unexpected interactions will occur, and every type of accident has this in common: ∑Nobody perceived the conspiracy of events that would lead to disaster ∑They were all preventable – which means that blame will be allocated. Management’s legal liabilities are likely to increase in the future. In the UK, a new draft bill proposes the introduction of the new offense of corporate killing. This hinges on past cases where charges of manslaughter have been unsuccessful, as it was impossible to lay the blame on any specific individual, and there was no precedent for ‘convicting’ a company. However, according to Hadden-Cave (1999), the new bill will introduce corporate killing, reckless killing, and gross carelessness. Once this is introduced, it could be adopted throughout the Commonwealth, which often shadows English Law. Other parts of the world are facing similar changes and have already progressed management’s liability to new frontiers. Fulfilling these legal and ethical obligations requires that safety risks be identified, quantified, and managed accordingly. The crucial question will be whether management (for all stakeholders) failed to provide for safety. In terms of criminal liability, all companies will have to look very carefully at their safety management systems. Legislation generally requires the production of a written justification that a new system is acceptably safe before it is allowed to enter service. Traditionally, this has been addressed by presenting a large collection of test results, safety analyses, outputs, and other data to a third party (such as a regulatory body). The hope is often that the weight (quite literally) of such evidence will be accepted as an overwhelming demonstration that the system has been adequately proven. However, as systems become more complex and software intensive, assessment of the completeness and consistency of such information becomes more difficult. What is needed is a far more rigorous approach to safety, which provides logical arguments with supporting evidence and has clearly defined objectives, strategies, assumptions, and justifications. We often hear that safety is paramount – or that it has the highest priority. Safety is an emotive and subjective topic, and many people want all risks eliminated at all costs. This is seldom possible. What is needed is a practical and consistent approach to target potential causes of harm and identify where the most benefit could be derived. A balanced view must be taken in which safety does not dominate and prevent effective business but in which safety is not ignored, as it so often has been in the past. Safety must be built in, not added on. The emphasis should be on hazard identification and analysis rather than on the reliability of design standards. It involves a planned, disciplined, systematically organized, and proactive process. The emphasis should be placed on considering safety as a design parameter and thereby integrating an acceptable level of safety into the system in the first place. This requires a disciplined application of the tools and methods involved in order to ensure a cost-effective achievement of the desired goal. Yet historically, the degree of rigor applied to these processes has often been less than the consequences of error might suggest to be appropriate. Complex1 new technologies, more often than not, have a significant effect on safety. Aviation’s history provides evidence that, whatever the benefits of technological advances, the safety graph dips – or at least wavers – while the industry learns how to use the new technology. There is a clear indication that the sheer complexity of modern systems creates problems for notions of management control (Smith, 1999). Weaknesses in the management of complex technological systems permit predictable and unintentional errors and cause catastrophic loss (Keely, 2000). Given the sheer complexity of modern systems, management faces problems of emergence – where elements of a system interact to create properties that had previously been unforeseen. When it comes to system safety, the ‘total is often more than the sum of the parts.’ By breaking complex systems down into their component parts (reductionism) to generate solutions, we compound the risk of further failure by neglecting the impact of such interventions on the emergent properties of the system. Designs likely to mature within the next decade will involve even more critical use of complex systems, many of which will apply ∑digital techniques to achieve the complex functions envisaged ∑in system integration (including inter-reactions and inter-dependabilities) (Collins and Perry, 2003) ∑redundancy and reconfiguration capabilities (Collins and Perry, 2003). Demonstrating the accomplishment of safety requirements is likely to be a formidable task. The problem is that many system engineers do not have the appropriate training in the required safety approaches, tools, and techniques, and their managers do not know when and how they may be applied. A revised relationship between management and safety is the most important avenue to explore. It is this relationship between complexity and control that lies at the heart of the problem of safety management and which is of both pragmatic and academic importance. We need some way of measuring safety and an ability to ensure that we arrive at the necessary safety parameters. It is implicit, therefore, that all reasonably foreseeable hazards have to be identified systematically (throughout the product life-cycle, not only during development) and the risk assessed before a judgment can be made upon their acceptability. In order to do this, we have to understand the issues that influence safety and the means by which they are identified and managed. Only then can we judge the acceptability of any threats associated with the initial and continued use of a particular product? This book will attempt to address many of these issues. In Chapter 1, we consider the legal issues associated with system safety. The purpose of this chapter is to reinforce the liabilities assumed in the generation of safety-related documentation. In Chapter 2, we attempt to put the term ‘safety’ into perspective and the basic approaches used to achieve it. The next three chapters will then explore three of these approaches; the use of Regulatory Standards is explored in Chapter 3; Chapter 4 considers the risk-based approach, which is widely adopted in the military industry as well as by Health & Safety specialists; Chapter 5 introduces the civil aeronautical approach to safety assessments, which (for the want of a better term) we shall call the ‘goal-based’ approach (in contrast to the risk-based approach in Chapter 4) as it provides clear goals (i.e. failure probability targets) for system designers to achieve. In Chapter 6, we consider the issues surrounding the application of the term ‘hazard’ and how the causes of hazards can be identified. Appendix A supports this chapter as it summarises a list of potential tools and techniques that can be used for cause and consequence assessments. Chapter 7 provides an introduction to the fail-safe concept, which is needed to ensure the high levels of functional integrity needed from essential systems. The next two chapters consider the generic approach to two frequently asked-for deliverables. Chapter 8 considers the system safety assessment (SSA), which is usually required for the certification of a new/modified system. In the civil arena, the system safety analysis is often based on the goal-based approach. In contrast, the safety case is considered in Chapter 9. The safety case is the document that manages (via the risk-based approach) the major hazards that an operator/maintainer of a system/facility faces, as well as the means employed to control those hazards. Probability assessment (either qualitative or quantitative) is an essential part of any safety validation (whether risk- or goal-based). Chapter 10 provides some guidance in this regard and should be read with an understanding of Chapter 7. In Chapter 11, we continue the probability estimation theme of Chapter 10 by applying it to the minimum equipment list, which allows the operation of a system despite deficiencies and equipment failures. Chapter 12 explores how, via the safety management system, organizations manage safety as an integral part of their business management activities. Appendix A supports Chapter 6 by summarising the advantages and limitations of some of the models used for causal or consequence analyses. Appendix B supports Chapters 4, 5, 8, and 9 by summarising useful safety criteria that can be used in safety assessments. Appendix C provides a brief introduction to goal-structured notation, which is useful for defining safety arguments, as referenced in Chapters 8 and 9. 1 Introduction Most industrial activities are regulated, and this includes military and civil aviation safety management. Ethical considerations and an increasingly litigious society regarding product liability have become driving factors in changing the way we conduct the initial safety certification (which leads to the release of a system) and manage the continuing safety of the system (including operations and maintenance). Laws are a system of rules that are intended to reflect social values and are enforced through the courts (e.g., it is unacceptable to steal, kill, etc.). Laws can be considered a compilation of rights, duties, and obligations – the violation of which could give rise to legal liability. In the aftermath of an accident, there is an increasing issue of corporate liability for the CEO and the board of blame (e.g., the design authority, maintainer, operator, etc.), with both fiscal and penal punishments for failure. In today’s world, litigation is very expensive, and the duty of care of the board exposes them, through their accountabilities, to the possibility of corporate liability – or even to charges of corporate manslaughter. The content of this chapter is based on English law and is intended to draw engineering management’s attention to the legal aspects affecting system safety – it is not meant to be, and should not be regarded as, a complete or accurate statement of the current law. Legislation in this area is developing throughout the world and is likely to continue to do so for some time. Under English law, legal liability is enforced in two ways: criminal liability and civil liability. 1.2 Criminal liability This is the law of offenses (i.e., crimes) against the state and those under its protection. Prosecution is usually started by the state and it aims to punish and to act as a deterrent through fines, imprisonment, orders and disqualification from holding office. Guilt is determined through the application of the ‘beyond all reasonable doubt’ principle. One example of the impact of criminal law on the work of engineers is from the legislation by the government through the agency of the Health and Safety Executive. The Health and Safety at Work Act (HSWA) of 1974 imposes duties on persons who design, manufacture, import, or supply articles for use at work to ensure (so far as reasonably practicable) that they are ‘safe’; to test them; provide proper information; carry out research with a view to eliminating risks, etc. The HSWA established the Health and Safety Commission (HSC) and the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). While the HSC defines policy, the HSE is responsible for the day-to-day monitoring and enforcement of the HSWA. The HSE3 has delegated powers to serve Improvement Notices (requires remedial action) and Prohibition Notices (stops a process). Failure to comply can lead to prosecution. The HSWA affects product safety as well as workplace safety and is based on the ‘as low as reasonably practicable’ (ALARP4) principle, where ‘practicable’ refers to what is possible to do, and ‘reasonable’ requires a balance of costs, time, and trouble against the risk. Reported in Aerospace International (RaeS, Nov 2005): ‘Henry Perrier, a former head of the Concorde division at Aerospatiale, has been placed under criminal investigation in connection with the crash of the (Concorde) airliner in July 2000. He may face a manslaughter trial for flaws in the aircraft, which could have contributed to the disaster. 1.3 Civil liability Criminal law does little for the victims of a crime. Civil law regulates the relationship between individuals and thus provides the mechanism whereby the wrongdoers have to compensate the victims. Guilt is determined through the application of the ‘balance of probability’ principle. Civil Law comprises Contract Law, Tort (civil wrong), the Law of Property, Succession and Family Law, etc. Action is started by a person (which, in law, includes a corporate body such as a company), and it has the aim to compensate (and to deter). Civil liability for a defective system can arise under the laws of contract, misrepresentation, tort, and other common law doctrines, and under current UK legislation. Liability can fall on the manufacturer, supplier, distributor, or certifier of products (Falla, 1997). In practice, such a supplier or manufacturer is a company and is regarded as a legal entity that can sue or can be sued in its own right. Suppliers of components can also be liable. In cases where the component is used in products that are exposed to the general public, the extent of such liability can be enormous. Under Civil Law (Tort), individuals can claim compensation if they can show that a duty of care was owed, this duty has been breached, and that a loss has been suffered. An example of this process is illustrated in Fig. 1.1. Plaintiffs have to prove that they were owed a duty of care, that there was a breach of that duty, and that the loss or damage was a direct result of that negligence. The claimant does not have to prove negligence on the part of the supplier. All professional work is done under contracts containing either an express or implied term that professional persons will use reasonable skill and care in the performance of the work. Under the Consumer Protection Act of 1987 (see section 1.4.1), a supplier is liable if there is a causal link between a defect and an injury (this is referred to as the ‘Liability of Tort’). A product is defective if it does not provide the safety that people are generally entitled to expect, taking into account all circumstances (all circumstances include ‘the manner in which and the purpose for which the product has been marketed’). Products are defined very loosely and without a doubt, include all aviation products – from substances, materials, and components to systems and platforms. Furthermore, a product consists not only of the product itself but also of the literature and warnings (i.e., instructions for, or warning of, doing or refraining from doing anything with the product) that accompany it. 1.4 Sentencing trends Consumer Protection Act The Consumer Protection Act of 1987 was enacted in the UK to fulfill obligations to implement a European Directive designed to protect consumers across member states. It introduces so-called ‘strict liability’ (as opposed to ‘fault liability’ in contract and tort) for defective products supplied in the course of a business. Where damage is caused by a defect in a product, then the producer is liable to compensate the injured party whether or not he is at ‘fault’ (Falla, 1997). Falla (1997) also highlights the fact that the removal of the fault criteria means that the Consumer Protection Act imposes the highest ‘standard of care’ on a producer. If a producer is not liable under the Act, it is unlikely he will be found liable for negligence. Only damage of a specific type may form the basis of an action under the Consumer Protection Act. The damage may be death, personal injury, or damage to property. However, only property of a type ordinarily intended for private use7 may be the subject of a claim, and property damage must exceed £275.8. A plaintiff who brings an action under the Consumer Protection Act must show that, as a result of the defect in the product, it was reasonably foreseeable that an injury of the type suffered would occur. This is unlikely to be difficult in the context of a safety-critical system: if it is not safe, it is reasonably foreseeable that persons will be injured and property damaged as a result. 1.4.2 Legal charges The legal consequence of product failures that subsequently cause harm and/or loss might include criminal actions (e.g., manslaughter, Health & Safety at Work charges, corporate manslaughter, corporate manslaughter by gross neglect) or civil actions (e.g., on the contract, trespass (person), trespass (property), negligence, strict liability actions). 1.4.3 Fines Fines under HSWA (sections 2–6) can be up to £20,000, with the average fine in 1997–1998 being £6,223. A judgment in the Court of Appeal (Regina vs. F Howe & Sons, Nov. 1998): a fine must be large enough to bring home to those who manage a company and their shareholders the need for a safe environment for workers and the public. While a fine should not generally be so large as to imperil the earnings of employees or create a risk of bankruptcy, there may be cases where an offense is so serious that the defendant ought not to be in business.’ Fines have been increasing under civil law (HSWA), e.g., £5.1 million in March 2001 for a boy made quadriplegic (civil). Fines have also been increasing under the criminal law (HSWA), e.g., a £1.2 million fine on Balfour Beatty in Feb 1999 due to the collapse of train tunnels in Heathrow Express Rail Link. 1.4.4 Prosecutions At the extreme, accidental loss of life could result in individuals and companies being prosecuted for manslaughter under criminal law. Any company is represented by senior members (e.g. the main board) who could be subject to imprisonment or fines. Kite and OLL (1996): Death of school children in a canoeing accident in Lyme Bay. Kite was one of only two directors and was jailed as the ‘controlling mind.’ Manslaughter is an unusual crime where the prosecutor does not have to establish intent but has to show a reckless disregard of accepted practices, gross negligence (or ‘such disregard for life’), or conscious wrongdoing before it is a criminal act. However, determining the extent of individual responsibility on the ‘controlling mind’ has led to many unsuccessful prosecutions. Hence, the Law Commission report in 1996 recommended 9 laws on ∑Corporate killing applicable to companies: this is intended to make a company accountable in criminal law where conduct falls far below that which can be reasonably expected in the circumstances. The proposed maximum penalty here is for an unlimited fine and a remedial order that is designed to prevent the original cause of the accident. In addition, directors might well be liable for disqualification. ∑Reckless killing and killing by gross carelessness: this is applicable to individuals, including company directors, where: – reckless killing typically involves an individual knowing that there is a risk that their product or conduct will cause a fatality or a serious injury and that it is not reasonable to take that risk. In this instance, the maximum penalty is quoted as life imprisonment. – A person is guilty of gross carelessness when the risk that the product/conduct could cause death or serious injury is obvious to a reasonable person in his position. The individual concerned should have been capable of appreciating the risk and that their conduct fell far below what could reasonably be expected of them in the circumstances. Or they intended their action to cause an injury, or they unreasonably took a risk that it might cause an injury. Killing by gross carelessness could lead to a maximum penalty of ten years in prison. The Law Commission’s suggested text states: 4 (1) A corporation is guilty of corporate killing if: (a) a management failure by the corporation is the cause or one of the causes of a person’s death, and (b) that failure constitutes conduct falling far below what can reasonably be expected of the corporation in the circumstances. (2) For the purposes of subsection (1) above: (a) there is a management failing by a corporation if the way in which its activities are managed or organized fails to ensure the health and safety of persons employed in or affected by those activities. (b) Such a failure may be regarded as a cause of a person’s death notwithstanding that the immediate cause is the act or omission of an individual 1.5 Organisational responses 1.5.1 Legal liability for dangerous or defective systems Manufacturers, suppliers, importers and designers of articles (which includes equipment for use at work) must (refer HSWA Section 6) in so far as they are matters within their control: ∑ensure that articles for use at work are designed and constructed to be safe at all relevant times, i.e., when they are being set, used, cleaned or maintained by persons at work ∑arrange for testing and examination to ensure compliance with the above ∑provide persons supplied by them with adequate information about: – the uses for which such articles are designed or tested – any conditions necessary to ensure that the articles will be safe at all relevant times and when being dismantled or disposed of ∑update the information referred to above as necessary, upon discovering that anything gives rise to a serious risk to health and safety. An issue that should exercise the mind of any supplier of a critical system is the question of exposure in law should the system fail. Directors A director of a company will operate under some form of service contract which will include, either explicitly or implicitly, a term that the director will take reasonable care in the exercise of his or her duties. A director has the authority to exercise the powers which the company has given him. If, in the exercise of such powers, he breaches his duty of care either through negligence or by a deliberate act or omission, the director may be held liable for the breach, the consequences of which could vary from the death of an unconnected individual to financial loss by the company’s creditors. The degree of fault required to impose liability on a director varies according to the consequence of the breach. This will depend upon whether he is liable under civil or criminal law.10 Breach of this contract will have the effect that the company could, in theory, sue the director, but the damages available to the company will be limited by the director’s resources. In addition, the company may have difficulty showing that the company’s loss is a consequence of the director’s breach of contract. Employees Negligent employees and independent contractors may also be held liable in contract and in tort, but again, the damages available will be limited by the individual’s resources. The distinction between an employee and a contractor does not depend solely on whether the contract declares a worker to be an independent contractor. Each case will depend on its own facts, but account will be taken of the ownership of equipment, the chance of profit, and the risk of loss on the worker’s part. 1.5.2 Organisational response to criminal law The standard ‘as far as reasonably practicable’ is used in the HSWA case law. The standard has acquired the meaning that the risk of adverse effects (e.g., death or injury) must be balanced against the cost, time, and physical difficulty of taking measures to reduce the risk. If the quantified risk is insignificant compared with the measures needed to mitigate the risk, then no action needs to be taken to satisfy the law. However, increased risk will require robust justification to support a choice of no action. All organizations must publish a Health and Safety Policy covering ∑risk assessment, identification, and minimization ∑procedures, and facilities for safe handling, storage, and transportation ∑product integrity regime ∑surveillance (information, instructions, supervision) ∑emergency procedures. Corporate response must include ∑a safety management system (SMS) ∑, safety management plans, and procedures/processes (including those to deal with product integrity). Milan Linate Airport (Oct. 2001), 118 casualties: A high-speed collision in severe fog between a Scandinavian Airlines Boeing MD-87 and a private Cessna Citation CJ2 occurred because the CJ2 was on the wrong taxiway and then crossed the active runway without permission. Four people were judged guilty (subject to appeal) of negligence and manslaughter and ordered to pay court costs, pay compensation to the victims’ families, and be disqualified for life from public service. Prison sentences: the Tower Controller and the Airport Manager each received 8 years, an official at Italy’s National Agency for Civil Aviation (ENAC) received 6.5 years, as did the managing director of Italy’s air traffic services. One of the issues criticized in the accident report was the lack of a safety management system: there were systematic faults in the sense that the [management] system had either not noticed them or had tolerated them. Source: Flight International (27 Apr.–3 May 2004) The Act also requires ∑a director in charge with explicit responsibilities for training, inspection (prevention), and investigation ∑of an explicit chain of authority and identification of responsibilities (often normal management chain and separate line to responsible manager) ∑regular auditing. 1.5.3 Organisational response to the civil law Project teams, contractors, consultants, software houses, advisers, independent auditors, test houses, manual producers, operators, maintainers, regulators, etc., all make for one big happy family until it goes wrong and there is a big hole in the ground (e.g. after the Concorde crash in France, the defendants included BAe systems, Air France, Continental, Middle River, GE, Goodyear, EADS, etc.). Then, the lawyers reach for their law reports, and legal liability will surely arise. Each party will then try to devolve its liability to the producers, operators, maintainers, contractors, consultants, advisers, integrated project teams (IPTs), independent advisers, regulators, etc. The crucial question will be whether management failed to provide for safety. In terms of criminal liability, all companies have to look very carefully at their management systems.11 Management needs to take the following actions to discharge a duty of care and to reduce the chance of product liability: ∑Establish an effective safety management system/process. Nominate key roles/ responsibilities. Define approval signatories – especially for safety reports. Establish independent verification/audit to reduce the chance of undetected errors. Establish a workforce-wide commitment to product integrity. Learn from previous mistakes. ∑Initiate a documentary audit trail (identify, log, and track all hazards). Airworthiness and safety must be foremost in the minds of the entire organization. Furthermore, as many legal cases turn on documentation, it is essential that risk assessment activities and choices are documented and that records are kept.12 ∑Spread the risks, either via contract terms or via insurance (see section 1.5.4). ∑Insurance can give limited protection against some civil claims; specific advice should be sought from brokers specializing in this field. 1.5.4 Organisational responses to the Consumer Protection Act Section 10 of Part II of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 make it a criminal offense to supply any consumer goods13 that do not comply with the ‘general safety requirement’ of it being reasonably safe with due regard to all circumstances. Organizations will have to ensure, so far as reasonably practicable, that the hardware and software are designed and constructed for the safe operation of the system (Safety-related systems, Guidance for Engineers, Aug 2002, page 14). This includes undertaking all necessary research, testing, and examination. It may not be necessary to repeat tests, examinations, or certification carried out by other parties in the supply chain, provided that it can be demonstrated that the system is appropriate for the purpose for which it is supplied. All information necessary for the safe operation of the system must be provided. The practical scope for a manufacturer or supplier to exclude or restrict their liability under the Consumer Protection Act is very limited. According to Falla (1997), the only practical step that a manufacturer or supplier can take is to ‘pass the buck’ by seeking an indemnity through a contract from the person who supplied it. The person who is likely to end up with the liability is, therefore, the person at the beginning of the supply chain.14 A producer may be able to rely on the following defenses: ∑that the defect did not exist when the producer supplied the product, ∑that the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the time was such that a producer of the same type of product could not be expected to have discovered the defect15 ∑that the component was supplied in accordance with instructions from the producer and the component would not contain a defect had the overall product been designed properly with the component in mind. This defense protects the component manufacturer against a claim arising from a defect in that component for which they would otherwise be liable. Note that Section 10 of the Act does not apply to goods intended for export or to second-hand goods (refer to Safety-related systems, Guidance for Engineers, Aug. 2002, page 15). Nor does it apply to retailers if they had no reasonable grounds for believing that the goods failed to comply with the general safety requirement. Defendants who can demonstrate that they follow ‘good practice’ will usually have a defense to an action founded on the case of negligence (Safety-related systems, Guidance for Engineers, Aug. 2002, page 18). This is because the test for negligence is based on a test of ‘reasonableness,’ and following ‘good practice’ will usually be synonymous with taking reasonable care. However, good practice may not be a sufficient defense for complex, integrated safety critical systems. Instead, a ‘best practice’ argument may be required, and a well-prepared safety case, safety assessment, and/or safety argument would be essential. 1.5.5 Contracts An agreement between parties forms the basis of a claim in a contract. Contractual relationships frequently exist despite the lack of a written document or prior to signing, provided that there is an agreed common intention to form legal relations (Falla, 1997). For a contract to exist, there must be ∑an agreement between parties that is formed from an offer given by one and accepted by another ∑a consideration which supports the agreement, e.g., money payable or a promise in return for the promise to perform the contract ∑an intention to create legal relations (this is presumed in most agreements). Under legislation that regulates the ‘sale of goods’ and ‘supply of services’ and which invariably applies to the supply of hardware and software, there are terms implied in the supply contract. Most important of the provisions are under sections 13 and 14 of the Sale of Goods Act 1979 as amended by the Sale of Goods (Amendments) Act 1994 and the equivalent sections 8 and 9 of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982: ∑Section 13 states that the goods supplied must correspond with their description. For example, if a computer system has a description that it will ‘perform X number of functions per second’ or that the software complies with specified standards, the supplier will be in breach of this implied term if the system or software is not as described. ∑Section 14 states that the goods must be of satisfactory quality17 and that they are reasonably fit for the buyer’s purpose. The latter part of this implied term applies where the buyer expressly or by implication makes known to the supplier any particular purpose for which the goods are being bought (whether or not that purpose is one for which the goods are commonly supplied). In many circumstances, such as in the supply of safety-critical systems, the purpose arises by implication. In circumstances where it would be unreasonable for the buyer to rely on the skill and judgment of the seller, or he did not, in fact, rely on the seller’s skill, then this term is not implied. In the safety-related field, it is also likely that a particular purpose will be expressed. Certain clauses (so-called ‘exclusion clauses’) are commonly relied on to exclude or restrict the liability of a party arising through the failure to perform a contract. The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 limits this ability to exclude or restrict liability in certain contracts. In particular, it is never possible to exclude or restrict liability in negligence or in relation to failure to take reasonable care in the performance of a contract for personal injury or death by reference to any contract term.18 A contract sets the parameters of liability, and the rules of privity (i.e. only a party to the contract is able to sue) limit the persons who can claim for loss or damage under a contract. Where, however, a duty of care can be established between a person who has manufactured or supplied a product and the person injured, then this injured party may be able to sue in tort for the negligence of the manufacturer or supplier (Falla, 1997). Falla advises that, in order to have a good cause of action in negligence, a plaintiff must establish that ∑the defendant (manufacturer or supplier) owed the plaintiff a duty of care, ∑there has been a breach of this duty which caused the injury or damage ∑the kind of damage sustained was reasonably foreseeable as a consequence of that breach. For a duty of care to exist, it must be reasonably foreseeable that in the absence of reasonable care in the preparation of a product, the consumer (or the innocent bystander) may suffer injury to his (or her) life or property. This duty will occur when the product is intended to reach the ultimate consumer in the state in which it left the manufacturer. In practice, it is not usually difficult to find one or more persons who owe a duty of care in the circumstances of the supply of a safety-critical system. Case law on negligence in product manufacture and supply has established a number of areas where a lack of reasonable care would constitute a breach of duty (Falla, 1997): ∑the design and construction of the product should be done with the care appropriate to the likely dangers in its use ∑the component parts should be inspected or otherwise examined to ensure that if properly used in the end product, the end product can be safely used by the consumer ∑the container used for the product must be suitable ∑the product must be labeled to take account of its dangers ∑proper instructions must be given for the safe use of the product. The manufacturer may raise a number of defenses, which could include (Falla, 1997) ∑that the manufacturer took all reasonable care whilst making the product to ensure that the defect was not present ∑and that the product was not initially dangerous but became so because of the action of some intervening person ∑that the manufacturer made it clear that the products should not be used before being tested. Products where computer software is a component present a further level of difficulty. It is not clear, for instance, what the software supplier needs to do to take ‘reasonable’ care in the design of the system.19 In practice, an injured party may face significant hurdles establishing a lack of reasonable care. Furthermore, the injured party must also prove that the damage which occurred was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the breach. 1.6 Implications on the engineer20 The Code of Professional Practice on Engineers and Risk Issues (hereafter referred to as the Code) became effective on 1 March 1993 and applies to all registrants of the Engineering Council. A member of the engineering profession knowingly and voluntarily undertakes a responsibility to others and, in doing so, shoulders certain personal, social, and professional responsibilities. Because of their involvement and understanding, engineers have a central role in the control of risk. Their professional duty rightly includes the exercise of competence 21 and integrity. It is evident that engineers can be held legally accountable for their actions or for a failure to act. Consequently, all engineers need to acquire an understanding of the law and its relevance to risk issues. Although absolute safety can never be guaranteed, this fundamental limitation is under no circumstances an excuse to avoid professional responsibility. The Code sets out the duties of a professional engineer working with safety-related systems. These general duties are often supplemented by law (e.g., Health and Safety at Work Act), industry-specific regulations (e.g., JAR25.1309), and local codes of practice applicable to a particular task. These all have the following requirements in common: ∑to take all reasonable care ∑and do all that is reasonably practicable to ensure safety ∑and show due diligence to prevent danger. The above three points are usually summarised in some sort of safety case, safety assessment, safety justification, or safety argument, which has the following main purposes: ∑firstly, and most obviously, to justify to others the confidence that designers and intended purchasers and users have in the safety of the system ∑secondly, to provide evidence that, even though an event may occur which was not foreseen or considered when the system was designed, all reasonably determinable safety related concerns were considered and dealt with appropriately in the design and certification of the system. This may provide an important legal defense. An in-depth assessment from first principles and a cost-benefit analysis are not needed for every job. The extent of consideration should match the nature of the hazard the extent and uncertainty of the risk, and the measures necessary to avert it. In many cases, it will be sufficient to identify and comply with the appropriate regulations. However, with hindsight (e.g., after an event), others may challenge actions/ decisions, and an engineer may have to establish the facts in the face of a hostile situation. Ultimately, a decision may have to be defended on judgment, and so, particularly where decisions or recommendations are finely balanced, the consideration should be documented and, if possible, corroborated. Individual engineers22 need to be aware of their limitations and not undertake tasks for which they are not competent (Safety-related systems, Guidance for Engineers, Aug. 2002, page 2). However, there is the possibility that ∑some engineers, however well-intentioned, ethically minded, and otherwise competent, might not appreciate their limitations for particular tasks which are, without them being aware of it, differ in some respects from those for which they have proved themselves competent in the past ∑some engineers are instructed to perform tasks for which they know or suspect they are not competent enough. For these circumstances, it is management’s responsibility to continually ensure that all practitioners have qualifications, experience, and qualities appropriate to their duties and that they are provided with the required resources and authority to perform their duties. Furthermore, sufficient diversity of input/participation will also ensure the intended integrity of the task. Engineers should be aware of the potential for conflicts of interest and for differences of opinion between themselves and their employing organization. In such circumstances, they are advised (Safety-related systems, Guidance for Engineers, Aug. 2002, page 25) to maintain written records, kept in a safe place, of any disagreement and the course of action that was taken. Words of wisdom ∑‘Do not believe, prove it for yourself’ ∑‘Do not ignore the feelings in your bones’ ∑‘Stand by the technical truth, however great the political or commercial pressures’ ∑‘Non fici facio – vera prae ceteres (don’t give a fig – truth above all)’ David, P.D. (1920–2003), (Chief Test Pilot for UK civil aviation authority for 33 years until his retirement in 1982) 1.7 Discussion The Engineering Council advises that engineers should, within the constraints of their work responsibility, seek to identify possible hazards and ways to reduce risk. They should not take the attitude that risk management is someone else’s business; rather, they should take the initiative. There is no substitute for professional practice in this regard. A systematic and documented approach will be more cost-effective and auditable and will be more likely to come to the right conclusions. As a minimum, key risk decisions, together with their reasoning, should be recorded. It should not be an unreasonable burden. If it is unnecessarily bureaucratic, the system must be modified to be more flexible so that it can cost-effectively contribute to product quality. To maintain professional integrity, as well as to avoid legal repercussions, specialist input must be obtained where necessary – even if it has to be bought in. Engineers should not exceed, nor ask others to exceed, their level of competence where the result may put people at risk. Similarly, it is important to validate the competence of contractors and sub-contractors. Professional judgment is by far the most important tool in risk management. Judgment is particularly important in the initial assessment of risks and deciding on their tolerability. Formal safety assessment methods should be used as airborne integrated data system to judgment, not as substitutes for it. Effective training is essential to success in almost every area of engineering, and risk management is no exception. The key to quality and efficiency is professionalism, which is a combination of expertise and attitude: ∑training and experience provide the expertise, while ∑company culture and experience shape the attitudes. In the event of an accident, people want someone to blame. We feel unsafe, and the only way to feel safe again is to blame somebody. We want one name or entity to blame, who, unlike the rest of us, caused us to feel unsafe. The truth is that there is never one name. But still, we feel much safer if there is someone to blame. And if the finger is pointed at us, our only defense will be accurate and measurable records of our company’s safety policy and its achievements. If companies involved in fatal accidents face the risk not only of paying compensation but also of having their employees prosecuted, then accurate and measurable records of a company’s safety policy and its achievements become important evidence. Remember that actions and decisions may be challenged by others with the benefit of hindsight. And hindsight is well known to be an ‘exact science.’ Our decisions may have to be defended on the basis of the judgment of the issue under concern, and, wherever possible, our decision-making process must be documented and validated. How would your records face up to third-party scrutiny? How would you be able to demonstrate that you have taken reasonable care as a professional engineer/manager should you be faced with a court appearance? The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort but where he stands at times of challenge and controversy. Martin Luther King Jr (1929–1968)