Title: Aircraft System Safety – Military and Civil Aeronautical Applications – Chapters 2 - 3 Author(s): Duane Kritzenger Category: System Safety Tags: Airworthiness, Aircraft, Safety, The safety concept 2.1 Understanding safety We often hear pundits pontificate the catch-phrase ‘safety at all costs!’ But what do we understand by the term ‘safety’? Safety can be defined as ‘freedom from unacceptable risk of harm’ (ISO/IEC Guide 2: 1986 Definition 2.5). But how do we determine an acceptable risk of harm? From an industry point of view, the acceptability of safety is very difficult to discuss with customers, users, and, even worse, society in general (Murphy, 1991). The perception of safety risk is often influenced by any combination of the following factors: Σ Ignorance. People may unintentionally accept risk because they are ignorant of the risks, e.g., consider the manner in which tobacco companies marketed the benefits of smoking during the mid-20th century. This trust is largely based upon pragmatics (Johnson, 2003). No individual is able to personally check that their food and drink is free from contamination; that their train is adequately maintained and protected by appropriate signalling equipment; that their domestic appliances continue to conform to the growing array of international safety regulations. On the flip side we may, sometimes irrationally, fear that which we know little about, e.g., consider arachnophobia in countries such as the United Kingdom where indigenous spiders are harmless. Σ Familiarity. People are more comfortable and accepting of risk when they are personally familiar with the operation. For example, is a traveller more fearful of a car accident or a plane crash? Which has the greater risk? Σ Media attention. We fear problems that we are aware of and that we think are important and credible. Media coverage of issues increases our awareness of a problem and our belief in its credibility. Σ Cost and inconvenience. A fear of flying transformed the early nineteenthcentury world in which it took several weeks rather than a few hours to cross the Atlantic. Another good example is the preference for forward-facing public transport, when it has been proven that rearward facing seats could significantly decrease injuries and increase survival rates. Σ Frequency. Our belief in the frequency of an accident influences our risk acceptance. If we do not believe that the accident will happen, we are more likely to accept the risk. Σ Control. Risks from sources outside their direct control are usually perceived to be more significant than they really are (e.g. nuclear power generation vs. conventional means). We accept more risk when we are personally in control, because we trust ourselves. For example, are you more afraid when you drive a car too fast or when you are the passenger in a speeding car? Σ Consequence. We are not likely to accept risk for facilities that can have accidents with severe consequences. For example, an accident at a nuclear power plant could affect a large population. Therefore, we build very few such plants and we stringently regulate their safety. The risk related to coal-fired plants may be higher, but such plants are not as stringently regulated by the government. Σ Suddenness of consequence. The sooner we feel the impact of an event, the less likely we are to accept the risk. Would you risk your life to save your car from a carjacker? Would you risk your life by smoking cigarettes for 40 years? Σ Personal versus societal. We accept risk that affects only ourselves. We apply a higher standard to protect society. Σ Benefit. Tolerance of risk can be related to perceived benefit; those who derive most benefit often tolerate greater risk than those who derive little or no benefit from the system. As the benefit we receive from an operation increases, we are more accepting of the risk. For example, driving a car is more risky than travelling by plane. Because of personal benefit, people are usually more accepting of driving than flying. Σ Dread. We have a strong fear or dread of risks whose severity we believe we cannot control. These risks are often thought to be catastrophic, fatal, hard to prevent, inequitable, threatening to future generations, and involuntary. An example is the risk of cancer. People are fearful of anything that may cause cancer because of the nature of the disease, its treatment, and, in some cases, the low probability of recovery. The above leads to the delusory concepts of ‘safe’ and ‘unsafe’ which, of course, have no real meaning and very little acknowledgement of a measured response to achieve an acceptable level of safety (Murphy, 1991). All systems have a probability of failing to a dangerous state, even though the probability may be extremely small. Miller (2003, p. 105) advises that we should think realistically of safety in relative terms, and he recalls the old vaudevillian exchange in which a man asks, ‘How’s your wife’, to which the comic responds, ‘Compared to what?’ 2.2 The importance of safety Safety is certainly important, but important relative to what? The problem is that safety is non-deterministic; that is, it cannot be measured directly. Consider the following two definitions of safety: Σ Safety is a perceived quality that determines to what extent the management, engineering and operation of a system is free of danger to life, property and the environment (Kuo, 1990). Σ Safety is the state in which risk is lower than the boundary risk. The boundary risk is the upper limit of acceptable risk. It is specific for a technical purpose or state (SAE ARP4754 p 80). The common dictionary definition of safety is ‘freedom from harm’, i.e., freedom from those conditions that can cause death, injury, occupational illness or damage to or loss of property, or damage to the environment. But does such an absolute application exist in the real world where we accept, live with, or otherwise integrate hazards into our everyday lives? It is probably safe to proclaim that there is no such thing as a safe system. Industry is required to develop products which are sufficiently safe. An unsafe product (actual or perceived) will result in retribution in law and/or the market place. Hence it is essential for management to ensure that effective procedures and practices are in place to ensure that a product is ‘safe enough’. Such procedures must ensure the law is satisfied and must also protect against the fallibility of the human (i.e. producer or consumer) involvement. But how do we then measure safety? Safety is an attribute of a product/system considered in the context of activities for meeting a specific goal. Safety is concerned with physical artefacts and in common with any other it has cost implications (Bradshaw, 1998). An artefact is unsafe if it can cause a hazard which may lead to unacceptable harm (i.e. an accident causing injury, loss of life, material damage or environmental damage). But what is ‘unacceptable harm’? Murphy (1991) reminds us that the safety of any system is always a compromise between: Σ the risk of potential accidents and their severity Σ the required performance and response time Σ design limitations (e.g. imposed by size or weight limits) Σ The costs of maintaining redundant systems throughout the product lifecycle Σ historical society perception of risk in the specific sector. Consider the following typical safety goals: An aircraft developer’s/integrator’s goal may be ‘to be competitive in meeting client’s specifications with solutions that are cost-effective at an acceptable level of safety’. An air force goal may be ‘to implement the defence capability by meeting operational requirements with solutions that are both humanresource efficient and cost effective at an acceptable level of safety’. Both these goals require solutions that can be feasible only if we juggle the five trade-offs above, so there is no such thing as absolute safety. At best it can only be an acceptable level that we are willing to accept or try to achieve. 2.3 Safety segments For purposes of clarity, we can loosely distinguish between three overlapping segments of safety. Σ Functional safety. This is part of the overall safety that depends on the system or equipment under consideration operating correctly in response to its inputs. It considers functional hazards caused by loss of intended function, malfunction, response time/accuracy, etc. Systems may be ‘safe’ in one application, but ‘unsafe’ in another (e.g. consider loss of altitude display during a clear day, versus the same failure under instrument meteorological conditions (IMCs). Functional safety is strongly connected to system performance and its reliability. Σ Operational safety. There are safety concerns which are directly related to the type of operations undertaken (e.g. combat missions; deciding to fly with inoperative systems; changing maintenance practices, etc.). Σ Physical safety. This is usually directly recognisable by examination of the system and operating environment and is strongly connected to the physical characteristics of the components in the system. Physical safety is usually governed by prescriptive health and safety legislation. 2.4 Ensuring safety There are various methods that can be used (in isolation or in any combination) to achieve satisfactory levels of safety. These methods can loosely be grouped as follows: Σ Informal guidelines. Safety is achieved by good practice in the form of informal guidelines prepared by persons/parties with an interest in user welfare. Informal guidelines are usually found in products/processes which are non-commercial but where accidents have led to attention. Leisure activities provide numerous applications of this approach (e.g. not flying a kite during a storm, or not using electrical appliances in the bath). Σ Formalised rules. Some accidents start raising concern and have the potential to affect corporate liability. Organisations thus draft rules, based on past experience, to help users in some specific activity. Examples can be found in company procedures and rules of classification societies. Σ Objective regulations. Safety is achieved by stipulating the top-level objectives which a system needs to accomplish, whilst leading the methodology (i.e. system architecture and process) up to the applicant. These regulations are often based on past experience (i.e. lessons learned). It is a straightforward and familiar concept. Compliance with safety standards and requirements can form part of a robust safety argument and facilitate the safety assessment process. Examples can be found in the regulatory activities of the Federal Aviation Administration and Joint Aviation Authorities (see Chapter 3). Σ Prescriptive regulations. Sometimes strict compliance is desired on a national level, which is then enforced by legal backing. In this case, one party devises formalised regulations/codes on an activity, function, product, process, etc., which are to be obeyed by other parties. These regulations provide a useful point of reference to the inexperienced (e.g. are considered an important mechanism for defining the safety management and design approaches required and to achieve, and to be seen to be achieving, a ‘safe’ product). Examples can be found in many military environments, such as the Military Standards and Defence Standards (see Chapter 3). This approach has similar advantages to the ‘objective regulations’, and is furthermore favoured by many insurance providers. However, its key weaknesses are that: – it often devolves responsibility from the design authority – cost implications are not always fully considered – it can inhibit innovative thinking because it does not always cater for new technology – is often difficult to keep up to date. Σ Established equivalence. Sometimes established regulations (especially if not objective-based) are too inflexible to deal with new technologies or alternative applications. The alternative solution is thus for the user to demonstrate to the authority that the new product/approach has equivalence to existing approved solutions. A typical example can be found in the certification of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) based on establishing an equivalent level of safety as manned air vehicles. Σ Subjective approach. Decision-makers consider the range of possible actions and select those that they believe are appropriate for the industry and society. This is a flexible approach that automatically takes account of economical and practical constraints. Unfortunately it has the potential to be inconsistent and open to abuse. Σ Technology-based approach. The best available technology is selected, regardless of the risk reduction it achieves, and sometimes regardless of cost. It is easy to justify, and so is often used under heavy political pressure. Unfortunately, technology alone cannot solve problems created by technology. New technology may be unproven, not cost-effective, and may introduce new hazards never encountered before. Σ Risk-based approach. The risk-based approach (see Chapter 4) is used to prioritise risk in such a way that attention is drawn to the most serious situations. Hazards are identified and assessed for the significance of their consequences before focusing on the more important ones. Σ Goal-based approach. This approach treats safety from basic principles. It manages safety by identifying failures, assessing their severity and allocating appropriate safety levels that need to be systematically accomplished (see Chapter 5). It is often used in completely new situations or modified existing situations. All these methods have their uses and are applied separately or in conjunction to suit any particular situation. Although the regulatory approaches are dominant, goalsetting and risk-based approaches are becoming more prominent. Chapter 3 will discuss the regulatory approach in more detail, whilst Chapters 4 and 5 will compare the risk-based and goal-setting approaches. Chapter 3 - Standards and regulations 3.1 Introduction A regulatory approach is the most common method employed to enforce a required safety standard or, in the case of many military regulations, to enforce a process. Most industrial activities are regulated, and this includes military and civil aviation safety management. Within the context of safety, this chapter explores some of the most widely used regulations used in the western aviation industry and how these influence our approach to safety. To regulate means to control by rule. From a national perspective, regulation is centred around control of the market place, and the regulators intervene to ensure that certain social objectives are not sacrificed in the pursuit of profit (Johnson, 2003). These objectives include: Σ the preservation of consumer rights Σ the protection of the environment Σ the protection of competition in the face of monopolistic practices Σ improvements in safety. Example The Federal Railroad Administration’s mission statement contains environmental and economic objectives as well as a concern for safety. ‘The Federal Railroad Administration promotes safe, environmentally sound, successful railroad transportation to meet current and future needs of all customers. We encourage policies and investment in infrastructure and technology to enable rail to realise its full potential.’ http://www.dot.gov/affairs/1999/fra1899.htm, as reported by Johnston (2003) Example A similar spectrum of objectives is revealed in the Federal Aviation Administration’s strategic plan for 2000–2001: ‘The first of their three objectives relates to safety; they will by 2007, reduce U.S. aviation fatal accident rates by 80 percent from 1996 levels. The second relates to security; to prevent security incidents in the aviation system. The final aim is to improve system efficiency; to provide an aerospace transportation system that meets the needs of users and is efficient in the application of Federal Aviation Administration and aerospace resources.’ Dembski (1998), as reported by Johnsion (2003) 3.2 Airworthiness 3.2.1 Design standards and airworthiness The term ‘airworthiness’ goes by a variety of definitions. However, for the purposes of this chapter, airworthiness will be viewed from the perspective of compliance to one key element of the Certification basis: the Design Standard. Design Standards are aimed at setting out rules and standards that are considered necessary to produce a safe product/system. It tells those involved in the design of a product/system what to strive for, what to do, and what not to do. The driver behind the formulation of Design Standards has always been to maintain an adequate level of safety by learning from historical experience of the participating stakeholders (e.g. authorities, designers, test facilities, accident investigation boards, etc.) Lloyd and Tye (1995) recall that the airworthiness requirements (e.g. British Civil Aviation Regulation and Federal Aviation Regulations) of the mid-20th century ‘were devised to suit the circumstances. Separate sets of requirements were stated for each type of system and they dealt with the engineering detail intended to secure sufficient reliability’. Where a system was such that its failure could result in serious hazard, the degree of redundancy (i.e. multiplication of the primary systems or provision of emergency systems) was stipulated. The traditional line of thought was that safety could be ensured by compliance to these predefined Design Standards. Unfortunately, accidents continued to happen, and it soon became apparent that it was a fallacy to assume that meeting these standards makes the system safe. The reason for this is due to the following limitations inherent in their application: Σ Design Standards often do not apply to an entire system and fail to consider the entire life-cycle. Σ Design Standards are often reactive, i.e., they are often formulated after the occurrence of an undesired event (the so-called tombstone imperative). Σ Design Standards encourage compliance with minimum standards and provide little incentive to consider safety further. In general, they are consensus documents which represent the minimum considered acceptable for systems of a particular type, and often they do not specify the hazard(s) which they are intended to prevent. These points are further emphasised by Chuck Miller (former head of the Bureau of Aviation Safety) who is known to have said: One of the shortcomings of … regulations … is that you can’t cover everything. Another is that they tend to classify components, and that’s not the nature of accidents. Accidents combine these problems with different pieces, or combine the characteristics of these different pieces into an accident. It’s called System Safety, and a System Safety approach makes sure that all the pieces fit together and that the interactions between them are adequately covered in some form of hazard analysis. Standards have other practical limitations as well: Σ Many prescriptive standards (see Section 3.3) do not keep up with technology advances (it can be difficult to apply to novel technology) and quickly become inappropriate (i.e., it can limit innovative solutions). As such, standards do not produce an optimal balance between investment and overall safety benefit. Σ Standards (especially if too prescriptive) can inhibit innovation, especially when the standards are too explicit in the means of achieving the required functionality (i.e., forces the choice of technology to solve a certain problem). Σ Standards are often expressed in a form and format which are not readily usable by industry in generating specifications, acceptance criteria, or compliance matrices. So why have Design standards? The reason for the existence of Design Standards is that it is important that past experience is used to the benefit of industry and society. From a safety perspective the use of Design Standards provides a framework within which a programme or project can be contracted to, or for a system to operate within. Furthermore, proving compliance to any accepted Design Standard should rightfully form part of any complete safety argument. However, for Design Standards to be useful they need to be constantly updated – especially the prescriptive standards. Dunn (1988) suggests that there are at least three things that make this necessary: Σ experience, quite often in the form of feedback from incident and accidents (e.g. new inspection techniques) Σ the development of new technology (e.g. fly-by-wire, fly-by-light) Σ demand from the market (in terms of safety requirements, societal expectations, etc.). 3.2.2 System safety and airworthiness System safety is often viewed in the aeronautical industry to be synonymous with the term airworthiness. However: Σ airworthiness is concerned with the approved configuration of the aircraft (as at the time of certification) and is primarily focused on the ability of the aircraft to continue safe flight and landing Σ system safety is but one element of the entire certification basis and, depending on the system level (see Fig. 8.1) and the regulatory authority (refer to Sections 3.4 to 3.6), may include safety of the aircraft and its on-board systems; safe application of ground-based systems which interface to it either directly or indirectly; all occupational health and safety threats to anyone involved with the aircraft and/or its assemblies. 3.3 Source of regulations Regulation is affected by many means, including an increasingly vociferous society, politicians, economic factors, international relations and, without doubt, the law (Williams, 2003). A simple high-level model of aviation safety regulation is depicted in Fig. 3.1. This model shows the interaction between the industry and the regulatory authorities and recognises the ‘input’ from the public in the form of ‘societal expectations’. Regulating involves using Regulations/Orders/Directives, Design Standards, as well as Advisory/Guidance material. All of these often fall under the blanket term ‘regulations’. They are meant to be easily understood, are often legally enforced, and apply to a variety of products and installations. However, the resulting regulations/ standards vary in the rigour of their application and/or enforcement. We can broadly make the following distinctions: Σ Prescriptive regulations1 usually prescribe that certain process/product features must be present, or that the process is performed in a certain way. These ‘strict’ standards may involve additional development costs, for given levels of safety, through requiring unnecessary additions to, or changes to, an organisation’s products and/or processes. So, they may not deliver the safest solution for a given cost (Falla, 1997) or result in any safety improvement. Σ Objective regulations2 are also usually prescriptive, but about relatively abstract features of the process/product. These standards are intended to ensure that a product/process has certain essential properties. A standard might, for instance, specify that a certain safety objective be met (or that audit trail must be provided) without specifying how it is to be done. These standards are intended to avoid over-constraining industry and allow different solutions and also the evolution of solutions. These ‘loose’ standards should in theory allow the most cost-effective compliance, through minimising unnecessary prescription and allowing maximum flexibility in ways to comply with those aspects which are prescribed. However, both the implementation of these standards and the assessment of compliance to them require greater judgement, and often greater experience of the responsible individuals, to determine what is an appropriate interpretation in a given situation. It is also possible to misinterpret the intentions of the requirements and to implement them in a less than satisfactory way. Σ Guidance/advisory material3 comes in the form of industry best practice. It usually supplements the prescriptive and objective standards and is intended to provide guidance on how those requirements can be accomplished. It provides a means of compliance but, most importantly, not the only means of compliance. In practice, most standards contain some elements of each of these styles, for instance: Σ IEC 1508 contains different parts, one with the mandatory high-level standards and the other with guidance on specific ways in which the high-level standards might be satisfied Σ the Joint Aviation Regulations/Federal Aviation Regulations/CS differentiates between regulations (i.e. the prescriptive bit) and advisory material that provides a recommended means of meeting the regulation. Each endeavour undertaken to design, certificate, support, maintain and operate aircraft fall under the standards and regulations of a regulatory authority. In order to assist entry into market and to reduce costs, it is vital that those involved with these endeavours have an understanding of the various ‘bodies’ involved in the market. Sections 3.4 to 3.6 will briefly summarise the key authorities in the western hemisphere. 3.4 Civil regulatory authorities 3.4.1 Background Most nations have their own civil aviation regulatory body (e.g. the United Kingdom Civil Aviation Administration, French DGAC, Australian CASA). These exist generally in five main categories: 1. Those that are totally independent and rigidly apply their own national airworthiness requirements, e.g., the USA applying Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) via the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 2. Those subject to multinational government agreements where a standardised set of requirements has been established and certification by one participant national authority is accepted by all other participant nations (e.g. Joint Aviation Authorities and EASA). 3. Those nations that have competent authorities but who, for the purposes of efficiency, chose to adopt (selectively, or wholeheartedly) the regulations of another larger authority such as the Federal Aviation Administration/Joint Aviation Authorities/EASA. 4. Those subject to international government bi-lateral agreements where, by arrangement, one authority can deputise for another. 5. Those, usually small nations, who accept certification by a larger nation. Most civil aviation authorities co-operate at some level, and are subject to international agreement. They apply similar standards to airworthiness and safety. Their interpretations may vary and ‘Special Conditions’ may apply, but the foundations are generally based on the requirements of the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). Both the preparation of new regulations and the development of changes to existing regulations are carried out by the civil aviation authorities through a process that involves detailed consultation with the interested parties in the aviation industry, via specialist working groups. Such additions and changes are then published for wider comment as Notices of Proposed Amendments (NPA) in Europe, and Notices of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) in the United States of America. Civil aviation safety regulation hierarchy Regulatory Agencies: Federal Aviation Administration Joint Aviation Authorities EASA, Regulations/codes: FARs (e.g. FAR23, FAR25) JARs (e.g. JAR21, JAR23, JAR25) IR (e.g. IR21) & CS (e.g. CS25); Advisory/guidance material: Acs (e.g. AC25.1309) ACJs & AMJs (e.g. ACJ25.1309) GM/AMC (e.g. AMC25.1309); Sources of specifications & recommended practice: society of automotive engineers radio technical commission for aeronautics aeronautical radio incorporated european organization for civil aviation equipment AECMA To be determined; Equipment specifications: Technical Standing Orders (TSOs) Joint Technical Standing Orders (JTSOs) European Technical Standing Orders (ETSOs). 3.4.2 International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) International civil aviation is governed by the Convention on International Civil Aviation (commonly known as the Chicago Convention). Under this Convention, the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), a specialised agency of the United Nations, sets the minimum Standards and Recommended Practices for international civil aviation. These standards are contained in 18 Annexes to the Convention. Of particular interest, in the context of system safety, are: Σ Annex 6 covering operation of aircraft Σ Annex 8 covering airworthiness of aircraft, which is supported by the international civil aviation organization Airworthiness Manual (within the context of system safety, note especially Volume II, Design Certification and Continued Airworthiness) Σ Annex 10, which contains five volumes covering aeronautical telecommunications. The responsibility for implementing Annexes 1 and 18 rests with the State of Registry (i.e. the State in which the aircraft is registered). The responsibility for implementing Annex 6 rests with the State of Operator (i.e. the State in which the airline is based). Often the State of Operator and the State of Registry will be the same, as airlines tend to operate aircraft registered in the State in which they are based. international civil aviation organization has six strategic objectives: Σ safety Σ security Σ environmental protection Σ efficiency Σ continuity Σ rule of law. The strategic objectives are action oriented and present a range of activities which include development, implementation and technical support. All countries4 who export aircraft or operate international flights are required to conform to standards, regarding design and operation, which satisfy the international civil aviation organization guidelines (Perry, 1998). Every country is entitled to develop its own requirements to satisfy the international civil aviation organization objectives. However, most countries use and/or accept, either directly or with their own modifications and/or additions, either the European Joint Aviation Authority (JAA) or the United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Requirements/ Regulations, Joint Aviation Requirements (JAR) and Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) respectively. Some countries, such as Canada, publish their own airworthiness codes that are similar, but may not be identical, to the corresponding JARs/FARs. Among its many other activities, international civil aviation organization also (Perry, 1998): Σ monitors accident investigations worldwide and provides guidance on continued airworthiness Σ monitors compliance with internationally agreed Safety and Recommended Practices (SARP), in particular through its Safety Oversight Programme Σ issues a wide variety of technical, economic and legal publications as well as films, video tapes, slides, diskettes and posters. These are designed to assist government authorities, manufacturers and operators in the civil aviation community to ensure safe, orderly and efficient air transport systems worldwide. While the average designer will not normally be directly involved with these activities (since these are usually handled at national level), international civil aviation organization does set the requirements, applicability and implementation dates for major international standards that affect worldwide operation and safety. Thus, from a future products point of view, awareness of these activities is desirable. 3.4.3 Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) In the USA, the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 created the agency (under the name Federal Aviation Agency) and adopted the present name in 1967 when it became a part of the Department of Transportation. The major roles of the Federal Aviation Administration include6: Σ regulating civil aviation to promote safety by: – issuing and enforcing regulations and minimum standards covering manufacturing, operating, and maintaining aircraft – certifying airmen and airports that serve air carriers Σ encouraging and developing civil aeronautics, including new aviation technology Σ developing and operating a system of air traffic control and navigation for both civil and military aircraft by: – developing a safe and efficient use of navigable airspace – operating a network of airport towers, air route traffic control centres, and flight service stations – developing air traffic rules, assigning the use of airspace, and controlling air traffic – building/installing/maintaining/operating/auditing visual and electronic airborne integrated data system to air navigation – sustaining other systems to support air navigation and air traffic control, including voice and data communications equipment, radar facilities, computer systems, and visual display equipment at flight service stations Σ researching and developing the National Airspace System and civil aeronautics Σ developing and carrying out programmes to control aircraft noise and other environmental effects of civil aviation Σ regulating United States commercial space transportation Σ promoting aviation safety and encouraging civil aviation abroad by: – exchanging aeronautical information with foreign authorities – certifying foreign repair shops, airmen, and mechanics – providing technical airport information desk and training – negotiating bilateral airworthiness agreements with other countries – taking part in international conferences Σ regulating and encouraging the United States commercial space transportation industry. The Federal Aviation Administration license commercial space launch facilities and private launches of space payloads on expendable launch vehicles Σ conducting research on, and developing, the systems and procedures needed for a safe and efficient system of air navigation and air traffic control. Helping to develop better aircraft, engines, and equipment and testing or evaluating aviation systems, devices, materials, and procedures; also conducting aeromedical research Σ registering aircraft and recording documents reflecting title or interest in aircraft and their parts. Administering an aviation insurance program, developing specifications for aeronautical charts, and publishing information on airways, airport services, and other technical subjects in aeronautics. Of particular interest, in the context of system safety, are FAR25.1309 (for large aeroplanes) and FAR23.1309 (for normal, utility, aerobatic and commuter category aeroplanes). Both of these require some form of System Safety Assessment as the means of proving compliance. For more information on the Federal Aviation Administration, see http://www.faa.gov/ 3.4.4 Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) Industry continually has a paramount need for common international requirements relating to safety regulation. This is so that aircraft can be built and maintained to agreed and known standards, thus avoiding different national requirements for certification and enabling the relatively easy transfer of aircraft and their equipment. According to Ashford (1994) ‘A lack of harmonised safety regulations in all fields increases costs, works against a “level playing field” commercially, causes complications and delays in certification and approvals and can affect operating costs.’ In the European aviation industry this led to the goal of a single certification (so removing national variants), thus the formation of the Joint Aviation Authority (JAA) whose activities started in 1970,7 with inputs from the Federal Aviation Authority.8 The Joint Aviation Authorities Membership is based on the ‘Joint Aviation Authorities Arrangements’ document originally signed by the then current member states in Cyprus in 1990. The Joint Aviation Authority (JAA) is an associated body of the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) representing the civil aviation regulatory authorities of a number of European States who have agreed to co-operate in developing and implementing common safety regulatory standards and procedures. This co-operation is intended to provide high and consistent standards of safety and a ‘level playing-field’ (i.e. a uniform standard of requirements) for competition in Europe.9 The Joint Aviation Authorities’s key objectives10 are as follows: Σ Aviation safety. To ensure, through co-operation amongst member states, that Joint Aviation Authorities members achieve a high, consistent level of aviation safety. Σ Transition from Joint Aviation Authorities to EASA. To ensure the highest level of contribution to the European Union for establishing a European aviation safety agency that would absorb all functions and activities of the Joint Aviation Authorities in as short a period as possible and would ensure the full participation of the Joint Aviation Authorities in non-EU member states. Σ Business effectiveness. To achieve a cost effective safety system in order to contribute to an efficient civil aviation industry. Σ Consolidation of common standards. To contribute, through the uniform application of common standards and through regular review of existing regulatory situations, to fair and equal competition within member states. Σ World-wide aviation safety improvement. To co-operate with other regional organisations or national authorities of states who are playing an important role in civil aviation, in order to reach at least the Joint Aviation Authorities safety-level and to foster the worldwide implementation of harmonised safety standards and requirements through the conclusion of international arrangements. As is evident from the second objective, the Joint Aviation Authorities became a ‘gentlemen’s club’ with Joint Aviation Regulations compliance voluntary. Legal standing for the JARs was provided by the National Approval Authorities (NAA) in each member country (e.g. the United Kingdom Civil Aviation Administration, or the French DGAC). Unfortunately, despite the 4th objective above, this often led to the NAA’s adding their own supplemented requirements. The only way to give JARs the backing of law was for the European Community to legislate to adopt a common set of requirements. This process led to the formation of EASA, which will eventually totally replace the Joint Aviation Authorities. For more information on the Joint Aviation Authorities, see http://www.jaa.nl/ 3.4.5 European aviation safety agency The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union (EU) established the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) via Basic Regulation (EC) No 1592/ 2002 of 15 July 2002.11 With the adoption of the Basic Regulation (EC) a new regulatory framework (on common rules) was created in the field of European civil aviation. european union aviation safety agency became an agency of the European Union which has been given specific regulatory and executive tasks in the field of aviation safety. european union aviation safety agency thus became responsible for the airworthiness and environmental certification of products, parts and appliances for the majority of the civil aircraft registered in the member states of the European Union (EU). According to this Regulation, from 28 September 2003, EU Member States’ national regulations have been replaced by EU Regulations, and certification tasks have been transferred from National Authorities to EASA. The european union aviation safety agency rules for continuing airworthiness will be implemented at staged intervals over the next five years. Where european union aviation safety agency rules are not yet in place the national requirements of member states still apply. Example: The United Kingdom Civil Aviation Administration civil aviation authority Specifications and Airworthiness Notices contain: Σ operational requirements Σ maintenance requirements Σ design requirements. Due to the staged nature of the transition to EASA, the maintenance and operational aspects of the Civil Aviation Administration Specifications and Airworthiness Notices will continue to be applicable to all aircraft with United Kingdom certificates of airworthiness (including both new and used aircraft at C of A issue) when compliance with ANO Articles 8 and 9 and paragraphs 630 and 890 of Joint Aviation Regulations-OPS 1 and 3 is required. This applicability will remain until United Kingdom requirements are superseded by european union aviation safety agency requirements. Aircraft that are outside the scope of the european union aviation safety agency Regulation will continue to be regulated under United Kingdom national procedures. The agency’s mission is twofold: Σ to provide technical expertise to the EU by assisting in the drafting of aviation safety rules and providing technical input to relevant international agreements Σ carry out certain executive tasks related to aviation safety, such as the certification of aeronautical products and organisations involved in their design, production and maintenance. These certification activities help to ensure compliance with airworthiness and environmental protection standards. The Basic Regulation is supported by a set of Implementation Regulations: Σ IR Certification: Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1702/2003 laying down implementing rules for the airworthiness and environmental certification of aircraft and related products, parts and appliances, as well as for the certification of design and production organisations. Σ IR Maintenance: Commission Regulation (EC) No. 2042/2003 on the continuing airworthiness of aircraft and aeronautical products, parts and appliances, and on the approval of organisations and personnel involved in these tasks. The regulatory hierarchy of european union aviation safety agency Design Standards is illustrated in Fig. 3.3.12 Of particular interest, in the context of system safety, are CS25.1309 and CS23. Both of these require a system safety assessment as the means of proving compliance. For more information on the EASA, see http://www.easa.eu.int/home/regul_en.html 3.5 Military regulatory authorities 3.5.1 General Unlike the civilian aircraft industry, the military industry is both the operator and regulator of their aircraft – albeit in a separate department. Military aircraft operate under state prerogative and are thus usually the responsibility of the appropriate Ministry/Department of Defence. From a system safety point of view, this combined regulator/operator function presents at least two unusual challenges compared to the civil aviation industry: Σ The System Safety Assessment (SSA, see Chapter 8) conducted during System Certification is available to the operator – and is expected to form a key part of the operator’s Safety Case (see Chapter 9). In the civil arena, the system safety analysis is generally deliverable only to the certification authority and is usually not released into the public domain. Σ Being both the operator and the regulator, the Safety Case (see Chapter 9) is not only concerned with Safety Certification and Continued Airworthiness, but also with Occupational Health and Safety (see Section 3.6). The remainder of this section will explore some of the approaches taken by different military authorities. 3.5.2 United States military In the early 1990s, the United States military acquisition process was subject to more that 1,700 different prescriptive Military Standards/Specifications. In 1994 the (then) United States Secretary of Defence, William J. Perry, issued a directive:13 Instead of using Military Specification and Standards the policy was changed to procure against ‘performance specification’ (or objective regulation, see Section 3.1 above) as the new norm (i.e. what the product is to do, not how it should be made). The idea was to cut costs, and increase innovation by the use of commercial equipment and standards. The use of Military Standards is authorised only as a last resort. MIL-STD (Military-Standard) or MIL-SPEC (Military-Specifications) is an abbreviation used to describe an item that can meet standards determined by the United States Department of Defense. A MIL-STD can also be documentation which lists and explains a compilation of prerequisites and standards that an item must meet for department of defense acceptance. For example, a MIL-STD can be expressed as MIL-STD-X, in which the ‘X’ is a set of numbers or numbers and letters which designate a specific standard. Of particular interest, in the context of system safety, is MIL-STD-88214 and MIL- STD-810.15 It is interesting to note that many projects still contract against the requirements of MIL-STD-882, which (at issue D) is still procedurally very prescriptive. For more information on United States Military standards, see: http://dodssp.daps.dla.mil/ and http://www.defenselink.mil 3.5.3 United Kingdom Ministry of Defence Policy and requirements for the management of safety and environment in relation to the equipment and services the MoD procure, support and operate can be found in a series of Joint Service Publications (JSP) published by the MoD Functional Safety Boards: Σ The Safety Health Environment and Fire Board (SHEFB) publish the following top-level policy statements of the Secretary of State: Σ joint service publications 375 MOD Health and Safety Handbook Σ joint service publications 418, Safety, Health and Environmental Protection in the Ministry of Defence. A key element of the policy is that the MoD complies with the requirements of the Health and Safety at Work, etc., Act (1974) and other relevant legislation (see Section 3.6 below). The main purpose of the Health and Safety at Work, etc., Act is to ensure that employers provide a safe working environment for their employees. In the case of the MoD, the latter includes both civilian and service personnel. Σ The Defence Aviation Safety Board (DASB) publish16 the following regulations: Σ joint service publications 550, Military Aviation Policy, Regulations and Directives Σ joint service publications 551, Military Flight Safety Regulations Σ joint service publications 552, Military Air Traffic Service Regulations Σ joint service publications 553, Military Airworthiness Regulation. This document describes the Safety Management System for the management and regulation of military aircraft airworthiness; it contains mandatory requirements, advice and guidance. It is intended for all staff concerned with the airworthiness and safety of all United Kingdom military aircraft, their equipment, and air-launched weapons; it addresses policy, the acquisition process, the preparation of Military Aircraft Release, the Aircraft Document Set, the Release to Service and the management of change in-service. Σ joint service publications 554, Military Aviation Aerodrome Criteria and Standards Σ joint service publications 556, Military Test Flying Regulations Σ joint service publications 558, Military Aviation Diplomatic Approvals and Clearances. Σ The Ship Safety Board (SSB) publishes joint service publications 430, Ship Safety Handbook Σ The Land Systems Safety Board (LSSB) publishes joint service publications 454 Σ Land Systems Safety Assurance Procedures Σ The Defence Ordnance Safety Board (DOSB) publishes joint service publications 520, Ordinance, Munitions & Explosives Safety Management System Σ Defence Nuclear Safety Board (DNSB) publishes Σ joint service publications 518, Regulation of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Programme and Σ joint service publications 538, Regulation of the Naval Nuclear Weapons Programme. To comply with the Secretary of State’s policy, the MoD needs to ensure that the management and technical standards that are adopted are consistent with best civil and international standards. To achieve maximum harmonisation it is therefore MoD policy to utilise international standards where appropriate and an agreed (refer, inter alia, joint service publications 520 para 0109) hierarchy is as follows:17 Σ European Union civil standards Σ International civil standards Σ United Kingdom civil standards Σ Standardized north atlantic treat organisation Agreements (STANAGs) Σ United Kingdom Defence Standards. In the context of system safety, the following Defence Standards are of particular interest: Σ DEF-STAN 00-56 (Safety Management Requirements for Defence Systems), which revolves around safety management requirements that the MoD apply to all their platforms (e.g. tanks, aircraft, ships, etc.). Not dissimilar to the MIL-STD-882 approach, the United Kingdom MOD also contracts to DEF-STAN 00-56, which requires a ‘Safety Case’ (it refers to a contractor assisting the MoD with managing throughlife safety) and which defines safety in terms of reducing the risks of ‘Harm to human life (including MoD employees and the general public); material loss; and environmental damage’. Σ DEF-STAN 00-55 (Requirement for Safety Related Software in Defence Equipment), which again applies to all MoD platforms. This standard is often discarded in favour of the more internationally recognised RTCA-DO-178B. For more information of Defence Standards, see: http://www.dstan.mod.uk/ and http:/ /www.ams.mod.uk/ 3.6 Health and safety regulations The topic of safety revolves around ensuring that equipment provided will not endanger the health and safety of the user or the general public. All operators and facilities are subject to the health and safety statutory and common law duties which management owes their employees and the general public. During any acquisition project, an essential condition of compliance with these duties is compliance on the part of designers and manufacturers with health and safety specifications and procedures intended to ensure the safety of the product. Monitoring and enforcement of this compliance does not fall within the remit of any aviation safety authorities (who are primarily interested in technical airworthiness), but falls into the lap of the relevant Health and Safety Regulator in each particular country.18 Health and Safety legislation has a direct effect on the responsibility, authority, accountability and liability towards the safety management approach of any operator. It explicitly requires the operator to assess and manage the risk (which includes technical airworthiness risk) during the lifetime of the product/facility. This proactive approach is the backbone of current harmonised European Safety, Health and Environmental Standards and Regulations; the term ‘reasonably practicable’ enshrined in this act is interpreted as a balance between risk and cost. The principal health and safety legislation in the United Kingdom is the Health and Safety at Work, etc., Act 1974 (Health and Safety at Work Act). This sets out in general terms the health and safety duties of employers, employees, and manufacturers, suppliers and designers of articles for use at work. Health and safety regulations under the Health and Safety at Work Act are generally supported by guidance and sometimes by an approved code of practice (ACOP). Safety standards have a similar effect in law to an ACOP. Failure to comply with a safety standard may be taken as evidence of a breach in the Health and Safety at Work Act (joint service publications 553 Ch 1 page 3), which is a statutory offence and could also lead to common law liability. Section 6 of the Health and Safety at Work Act places particular duties on designers, manufacturers, importers and suppliers of equipment. The MoD acquisition community can assume several of these roles and are therefore fully subject to a number of associated duties. One of these is: ‘To ensure, as far as reasonably practicable that the article is so designed and constructed so as to be safe, and without risks to health’. Depending on the type of project or equipment it may be necessary to consider whether additional legislation applies, for example: Σ The Merchant Shipping Act 1995 Σ The Civil Aviation Act 1982 (which refers to the applicable aviation safety regulator) Σ The Road Traffic Act 1991 Σ The Explosives Act 1875 Σ The Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 1992. The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992 sets out management responsibilities to demonstrate that all risks associated with work activities (which includes the maintenance and operation of aircraft) are reduced to a level that is as low as reasonably possible (T853, Block 3 Part 5 pp. 4–8). The emphasis in post- 1992 legislation is on developing the ‘safety case’ approach, which demonstrates that an organisation has implemented a risk management system, and that the goal of ‘all risks are reduced to a level that is ALARP’ (as low as reasonably practicable) is achieved. So, since 1992 a Risk Assessment Approach (see Chapter 9) has become the cornerstone of all United Kingdom health and safety legislation and Standards. For more information of the United Kingdom Health and Safety at Work Act, see http://www.hse.gov.uk 3.7 The impact on organisations For many organisations, certification as a contractual obligation has been largely limited to a requirement to meet certain recognised Standards. This often leads to the following recurring issues: Σ The manner in which compliance to a Standard is demonstrated. Proving compliance (e.g. by analyses or tests) down to paragraph level is costly and time consuming. Criticism is often levelled at the authorities regarding the cost of safety certification. While this, in some cases, is justified, the constructors do not always make life as easy in this respect as they could. The concepts of ‘Certification by Design’ and ‘Design for Certification’ should be borne in mind since they offer a way not only towards optimising the certification process but also improving the system design and hence reducing costs. Σ For international programmes, to design and build equipment to different certification requirements means either to build to the ‘envelope’ of the requirements or build to different standards. A lack of harmonised safety regulations/requirements increases costs (contract sunk costs as well as other product lifecycle costs), works against a ‘level playing field’ commercially and causes complications and delays in certification. As industry has to operate outside the boundaries of any one authority’s jurisdiction, it has a fundamental need for the harmonisation of requirements over as wide a sphere of influence as possible. This has been the fundamental driver in the establishment of the Joint Aviation Authorities and EASA. However, industry has to be the facilitator or catalyst for any harmonisation activity. It has to be an active participant, i.e., an intervener, not just an acceptor (Senker, 1990), in this process to ensure that the engineering difficulties and the cost associated with achieving an adequate level of safety can be accurately assessed. Σ For the aircraft industry to benefit from emerging technologies, affordability and effectiveness of these innovations depends on clarifying and simplifying certification processes: – It is argued that the William J. Perry approach (refer Section 3.5.2) requires more initial effort to define the performance but less in evaluating the responses and allows the industry to offer solutions based on their strengths. Hence the realisation that suppliers should be given a performance requirement, i.e., what the product is to do, not how it should be made. – The aerospace industry shows a decreasing reliance on defence-unique requirements and a greater reliance on the commercial market. The emphasis of the integration of commercial and military development ensures that the strengths of industry are used where possible. Where an application is not purely military there should be no need for a unique military specification. Aircraft systems will become increasingly complex in the years to come and hence increasingly difficult to monitor and govern. However, at the same time there will be increasing convergence of technology, economics, environment, safety, regulatory regimes, etc. This combination of complexity and convergence means an increasing global need for information co-operation with a real need for world-wide information sharing and co-operation. 3.8 The impact on safety management systems Jenkins (1999, p. 10) warns that the impact of a regulatory style on the form of Safety Management System (SMS) cannot be underestimated. When the safety management system process is enforced by rules, instructions, externally imposed physical and operational standards, etc., there is little room for innovation or discretion. There is an ever-present danger of creating separate formal policies to respond to each regulator or to each new hazard. At a strategic level, the safety aspirations and principles (policies) are common to all processes and hazards, whilst at the detailed or activity level the implementation is specific and tailored to the process and hazard. If a manager has a good grasp of what the fundamental principles are, then it is no longer necessary to develop too many different processes for delivering that principle in order to achieve good safety performance. 3.9 Discussion Standards and Regulations provide the basis of a consistent approach to a project, but must: Σ be underpinned by a sound and extensive knowledge base (i.e. using data to drive decisions) Σ the regulations must be separated from information that is advisory Σ be based on cost-benefit analysis (Senker, 1990) Σ consult industry at the earliest stages of rulemaking (Senker, 1990). Because authorities are moving from high levels of direct intervention towards industry accountability, industry must be empowered by: Σ requiring organisations to have self-correcting internal systems Σ becoming interveners (instead of acceptors) in the formulation of policy and standards. Nationally and internationally, industry and authorities (civil and military) need to collaborate with a prime objective of minimising certification costs, engender a safety culture and achieve safety goals. This will require (Senker, 1990): Σ a convergence of definitions and terminology (common understanding) Σ clear goals and a consistent approach Σ have regard to public expectations for increasing levels of safety. Markey (1994) warns that we should learn from mistakes, but must always be mindful of resorting to reactive legislation only when it is unavoidable, and after careful consideration of the cost and risk factors involved. So, although engineering codes, standards and regulations are necessary for design, and in many countries their use is required by law, they are insufficient for hazard identification and need to be supplemented by other techniques. Rather than placing reliance on the regulatory system alone, this will require the adoption of disciplined and systematic safety assessment and safety management methodologies to guide us through the safe application of complex technologies of the future.