Title: Airworthiness: An Introduction to Aircraft Certification: A Guide to Understanding JAA, EASA, and federal aviation administration Standards - Chapters 1 – 2 – 3 Author(s): Filippo De Florio Category: Certification Tags: Certification, Aircraft, Airworthiness Preface This book is based on my book Aeronavigabilita (Airworthiness), written in Italian at the end of 2002 and published by IBN Editore, Rome. Despite their many commonalities, EASA, the FAA, and other national aviation authorities regulate airworthiness in different ways. For this reason, this book retains concepts that can be applied generally, avoiding, as far as possible, references to a specific national system or to detailed procedures that are likely to be quickly superseded. Here is what I wrote in 2002 as the Foreword to Aeronavigabilita: I wrote these notes in order to provide the book I wish I had when, 'in the last century,' I began to be interested in aircraft certification. The book has an informative character; it was written to offer a panoramic view of airworthiness, and it was not intended to be a 'certification manual.' I have tried to express the concepts of airworthiness from a general point of view without going into the details of procedures that are likely to evolve quickly with the substantial changes that are foreseen by the aviation certification authorities. Regardless of this, the basic philosophies of airworthiness are unlikely to change significantly, and familiarity with the basic principles of the subject –either from the point of view of the regulating Authority or the aircraft owner or operator –will assist any engineer or other aviation professional in their work. This is a subject that depends not only on formalities and equations but on a good deal of common sense and on the collective experience of engineers and professionals acquired over more than a century of aeronautical activity. I hope this book will be a basis on which those in this field can understand and master the regulations and procedures that affect the professional training and practical work that certification engineers have to undertake in both regulatory authorities and aircraft engineering enterprises. Abstract The design of an aircraft is a synthesis of different disciplines like aerodynamics, flight mechanics, aeronautical structures, etc. Furthermore, to allow an aircraft to be operational in normal air traffic, it is necessary to demonstrate that its design and construction are in compliance with the applicable requirements; the verification of such compliance is entrusted to the competent authorities. Airworthiness introduces aerospace engineering students and engineers into this world consisting, on the one hand, of designers, manufacturers, and operators, and, on the other, of air-worthiness authorities, in two disciplines that should work in unison because they should aim at a common goal: flight safety. Chapter 1 Flight Safety Safety is a concept generally ingrained in the human mind; we will consider 'absence of danger' as its principal definition. Safety is something related to all human activities, and therefore, every civil society is organized (or should be organized) to guarantee public safety in relation to one's own or others' activities. This is certainly a moral obligation, but it is also a practical demand because accidents causing damage to persons and properties have a social cost. This is also the reason why human activities that could cause damage to persons and properties are controlled by national states through regulations. We will deal specifically with safety related to aeronautical activities, starting by considering what we have defined as the main conventional flight safety factors: man, the environment, and the machine. 1 Man is intended here as an active part of the flight operations; we then consider pilots, maintenance manpower, air traffic controllers, and others. Clearly, it is important to be able to rely on very skilled people in order to avoid errors that cause accidents or catastrophes in flight operations. It is then of paramount importance to place these people in a legislative and organized context to guarantee a suitable level of professional training, updating of techniques and procedures, and psychological and physical fitness. National states entrust special public institutions with the responsibility for such obligations. 2 The environment covers all the external factors that can influence the flying of an aircraft. This includes meteorological conditions, traffic situations, communications, aerodromes, etc. It is equally important to avoid situations that could jeopardize the aircraft itself. Then, we should consider correct meteorological information, rules for the vertical and horizontal separation of the aircraft, suitable aerodromes, etc. 3 The machine does not need a definition, but it is easy to understand the importance of a good project, sound construction, and efficiency in relation to the operations to be carried out. Also, in this case, national states entrust special public bodies with the responsibility of assuring that the project, the construction, and the operating instructions comply with flight safety. An important point regarding these safety factors is that they act in series and not in parallel. They can be seen as three links of a chain representing flight safety. The failure of a single link is sufficient for an accident to happen. A pilot's error can put the best aircraft in jeopardy, and the best pilot cannot compensate for a serious failure in an aircraft. Accident reports offer countless examples of this; however, accidents are often caused by a combination of factors that could involve all these safety factors. Nevertheless, the accident always begins with the failure of one of the above-mentioned links. In this book, we will deal with one of these safety factors: the machine. We will discuss design rules, the people who make them, who formulates the verifications from design to construction, and who is responsible for the organization of manufacturers and operators. We are going to deal with airworthiness. Chapter 2 Airworthiness A definition of 'airworthiness' can be found in the Italian RAI-ENAC Technical Regulations: 'For an aircraft, or aircraft part, [airworthiness] is the possession of the necessary requirements for flying in safe conditions, within allowable limits.' In this definition, three key elements deserve special consideration: safe conditions, possession of the necessary requirements, and allowable limits. 1 We can take for granted the meaning of safe conditions relating to the normal course and satisfactory conclusion of the flight. According to one definition, safety is the freedom from those conditions that can cause death, injury, illness, damage to/loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment. 2 Possession of the necessary requirements means that the aircraft, or any of its parts, is designed and built according to studied and tested criteria to fly in safe conditions, as mentioned above. Regulations are intended to promote safety by eliminating or mitigating conditions that can cause death, injury, or damage. Who establishes these regulations? The airworthiness authorities are appointed by the national states. These are obtained through the publication of airworthiness standards (see details in the following chapters) containing a series of design requirements, from the strength of the structures to the flight requirements (flight qualities and performance), criteria for good design practice, systems, fatigue and flutter, necessary tests, flight and maintenance manual content, and so on. These standards are different for different types of aircraft. Obviously, it is not possible to design a sailplane, a 'Jumbo,' or a helicopter using the same rules. An important peculiarity of these standards is their evolution as time passes. Generally, a standard does not precede aeronautical progress. It follows it and sometimes accompanies it. A 'blocked' standard would prevent aeronautical progress. It follows that the rules have to continuously fit with technical aeronautical evolution. Moreover, very often Airworthiness accident analysis leads to additional rules which, had they been applied to the design, might have prevented the accident or at least limited its effects; this process could be regarded as 'afterthoughts,' but it is better to consider it as 'experience.' The changing of the standards (normally with the purpose of adding something new or different) makes the design compliance with the rules more and more expensive, but this is the price to pay to improve flight safety. 3 Allowable limits. Aircraft are designed for operation within a certain 'flight envelope,' which depends mainly on speed and structural load factors. In addition, the maximum weight of the aircraft can be established differently for different types of operations. Operational conditions of the aircraft, such as day-VFR, night flight, instrumental flight, in or out of icing conditions, etc., are also established. Exceeding these conditions and limits can cause accidents. Overweight take-off, aerobatic maneuvers performed with aircraft designed with load factors for non-aerobatic operations, flights in icing conditions without suitable protection, and exceeding the speed limits are just a few examples of the importance of flying within the allowable limits. Pilots are made aware of these limits through the flight manual, through the markings and placards displayed in the cockpit, and, of course, through training. Chapter 3 The international civil aviation organization and the Civil Aviation Authorities 3.1 The international civil aviation organization (International Civil Aviation Organization) The first recorded flight by a heavier-than-air machine was by the Wright brothers on 17 December 1903 in North Carolina. Since the earliest years of aviation, far-seeing people envisaged a new dimension of transport that would go beyond national boundaries. In 1910, the first conference on air navigation international law was hosted by France in Paris, with the attendance of 18 European states. The First World War fostered considerable development of aeronautical techniques, also demonstrating the potential for the transport of goods and people. After the war, it became increasingly evident that this advanced means of transport would require international attention. These problems were debated at the Paris Conference of Peace in 1919, and the discussions led to the establishment of an Aeronautical Commission. To succeed in making aviation an instrument of peace, an International Air Convention was written and ratified by 38 states. The Convention contemplated all aspects of civil aviation and also established an International Commission for Air Navigation (ICAN) to monitor the development of civil aviation and propose measures for this development. The years between the two world wars marked a continuous development of civil aviation both in the technical and commercial fields. The Second World War, apart from the horrors also caused by the operations of progressively more sophisticated military airplanes, had a major effect on the technical development of the airplane, compressing a quarter of a century of normal peacetime development into six years. The possibility of carrying a great number of people and a large quantity of goods over long distances became a reality. For these reasons, the Government of the United States conducted The international civil aviation organization and the Civil Aviation Authorities exploratory discussions with other allied nations from the early months of 1944. On the basis of these talks, invitations were sent to 55 allied and neutral states to meet in Chicago in November 1944. Of these 55 states, 52 attended. The outcome of five weeks of meetings was the Convention on International Civil Aviation, consisting of a preamble and 96 articles. The international civil aviation organization officially continuing airworthines management exposition into existence on 4 April 1947. At the invitation of the Government of Canada, Montreal was chosen as the site for its headquarters. Presently, the Contracting States number more than 180. The aims and objectives of the international civil aviation organization are to develop the principles and techniques of international air navigation and to foster the planning and development of international air transport so as to: 1 Ensure the safe and orderly growth of international civil aviation throughout the world. 2 Encourage the arts of aircraft design and operation for peaceful purposes. 3 Encourage the development of airways, airports, and air navigation facilities for international civil aviation. 4 Meet the needs of the peoples of the world for safe, regular, efficient, and economical air transport. 5 Prevent economic waste caused by unreasonable competition. 6 Ensure that the rights of the Contracting States are fully respected and that every Contracting State has a fair opportunity to operate international airlines. 7 Avoid discrimination between Contracting States. 8 Promote the safety of flight in international air navigation. 9 Promote generally the development of all aspects of international civil aeronautics. 3.1.1 The International Standards Since the international civil aviation organization was created, the main technical task of the organization has been to achieve standardization in the operation of a safe, regular, and efficient air service. This has resulted in high levels of reliability in the many areas that collectively shape international civil aviation, particularly in relation to the aircraft, their crews, and the ground-based facilities and services. Standardization has been achieved through the creation, adoption, and amendments of 18 Annexes to the Convention, identified as International Standards and Recommended Practices. Standards are directives that international civil aviation organization members agree to follow. If a member has a standard different from an international civil aviation organization Standard, that member must notify the international civil aviation organization of the difference. Recommended practices are desirable but not essential practices. The basic principle for deciding whether a particular issue should be a Standard is an affirmative answer to the question: 'Is uniform application by all Contracting States essential?' On the basis of the Convention, the Contracting States are engaged to achieve the highest practical degree of worldwide uniformity in regulations, organizing procedures in relation to aircraft, personnel, airways, and auxiliary services whenever this will facilitate and improve air safety, effectiveness, and regularity. The 18 Annexes are described as follows: •Annex 1. Personnel Licensing – provides information on the licensing of flight crews, air traffic controllers, and aircraft maintenance personnel, including medical standards for flight crews and air traffic controllers. •Annex 2. Rules of the Air – contains rules relating to visual and instrument-aided flight. Annex 3. Meteorological Service for International Air Navigation provides meteorological services for international air navigation and reporting of meteorological observations from aircraft. •Annex 4. Aeronautical Charts – These contain specifications for the aeronautical charts used in international aviation. •Annex 5. Units of Measurement to be used in Air and Ground Operations – lists dimensional systems to be used in air and ground operations. •Annex 6. Operation of Aircraft – enumerates specifications to ensure a level of safety above a prescribed minimum in similar operations throughout the world. The three parts of this Annex are as follows: Part I. International Commercial Air Transport – Airplanes Part II. International General Aviation – Airplanes– Part III. International Operations – Helicopters. • Annex 7. Aircraft Nationality and Registration Marks – specifies requirements for registration and identification of aircraft. • Annex 8. Airworthiness of Aircraft – specifies uniform procedures for certification and inspection of aircraft. • Annex 9. Facilitations – provides for the standardization and simplification of border crossing formalities. • Annex 10. Aeronautical Telecommunications – Volume 1 provides for standardizing communications equipment and systems. Volume 2 standardizes communications procedures. • Annex 11. Air Traffic Services – includes information on establishing and operating ATC, flight information, and alerting services. • Annex 12. Search and Rescue – provides information on the organization and operation of facilities and services necessary for search and Rescue (SAR). • Annex 13. Aircraft Accident Investigation – provides for uniformity in notifying, investigating, and reporting on aircraft accidents. • Annex 14. Aerodromes – contains specifications for the design and equipment of aerodromes. • Annex 15. Aeronautical Information Services – includes methods for collecting and disseminating aeronautical information required for flight operations. Annex 16. Environmental Protection – Volume 1 contains specifications for aircraft noise certification, noise monitoring, and noise exposure units for land-use planning. Volume 2 contains specifications for aircraft engine emissions. • Annex 17. Security – Safeguarding International Civil Aviation against Acts of Unlawful Interference – specifies methods for safeguarding international civil aviation against unlawful acts of interference. • Annex 18. The Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air – specifies requirements necessary to ensure hazardous materials are safely transported in aircraft while providing a level of safety that protects the aircraft and its occupants from undue risk. Because aeronautical technology is continuously developing, the Annexes are constantly reviewed and updated when necessary. The typical content of an Annex is based upon: 1 Standards intended as specifications when their application is considered necessary for the safety and regularity of international air navigation. 2 Recommended practices intended as specifications when their application is considered as a recommendation in the interest of safety, regularity, and efficiency of international air navigation. 3 Appendices dealing with the preceding points. 4 Definitions of the used terminology. The Contracting States have issued norms that do not strictly copy the contents of the Annex, which essentially state some of the principles or objectives to attain. The norms contain the requirements used to reach the objectives. Furthermore, while the principles can remain the same, the requirements are often influenced by the state of the art (technical evolution, new technology, and acquired experience), and they are then likely to be improved and amended. The applicable JAA/FAA/EASA airworthiness standards for the certification of aircraft to be internationally recognized are issued in accordance with the international civil aviation organization Annexes. Then, from a practical point of view, the certification process is based on these airworthiness standards rather than (directly) on the international civil aviation organization International Standards. In order to remain within the scope and objectives of this book, we will consider the content of the three Annexes that are directly connected with airworthiness: •Annex 6. Operation of Aircraft. This Annex contains the standards and recommendations relating to the operation of aircraft for international commercial air transport, including the regulation for the certification of the operators. It also contains the technical and operational regulations for general international aviation activities, including maintenance.• Annex 8. Airworthiness of Aircraft. This Annex contains the standards defining the minimum level of airworthiness for the development of the type certification requirements as a basis for the international recognition of the certificates of airworthiness for aircraft (according to Article 33 of the Convention) in order to fly into and land in the Contracting States. It also contains indications and provisions for the organization and functions of the civil aviation authorities. Annex 16. Environmental Protection. This Annex contains the standard applicable to the aircraft noise certification in relation to different noise levels proportionate to the type of aircraft (propeller-driven, jet-propelled, helicopters). It states the test procedures accurately for an effective and unequivocal measurement. The standard contained in this Annex is normally used as proposed because it is directly applicable to all of the technical requirements. The Annex also contains the standard relating to the aircraft engine emission certification with reference to the toxicity of some chemical components, such as azoth oxide. This is a particularly discussed Annex at present because it deals with a sensitive social matter, noise for people living near aerodromes, and the conflict between the sometimes opposing demands of economic development and the protection of citizens. 3.2 The Civil Aviation Authorities 3.2.1 Origins The national states of developed countries have established institutions and authorities to guarantee flight safety. In many cases, these organizations evolved from pre-existing institutions for the safety of marine and river navigation. It is of interest to point out that, historically, the mainspring for the improvement of the safety of navigation is not a social principle but an economical choice made by insurance companies. The word 'register' was adopted by various navigational institutions and has a precise origin. In fact, it is derived from a register that a certain Edward Lloyd, owner of a tavern situated in the area of the river port of London at the end of the seventeenth century, filled with information on marine traffic gathered while talking to customers, such as ship owners and sailors. The collected information could be related to ships, traffic, and, most importantly, to accidents resulting in the loss of men, goods, and ships. This was the origin of the highly esteemed newsletter, 'Lloyd's News,' which was first issued in 1696. At the same time, marine insurance began to flourish, and Lloyd's Tavern rapidly became an important negotiation center. Lloyd was a practical man, well aware of the importance of the information he owned for the insurance business. Finally, Lloyd's, the incorporated society of underwriters in London, was born and was destined to become a world reference in the insurance field. When Lloyd died in 1713, his heirs continued his work; 'Lloyd's List,' filled with lists, data, and marine news, highly appreciated in the circle of marine traffic, was first published in 1734; the List, originally handwritten, first appeared in printed form in 1760. Meanwhile, other lists with various ship classification criteria were published by different ship owners until all the publications were unified into the 'Lloyd's Register in 1833, the first register in the world, which acquired legal status in 1871. Other national registers were subsequently instituted in Europe. Safety is obviously a matter of great importance for insurance companies: fewer accidents mean fewer indemnities to pay. It is also for this reason that the registers began to issue safety requirements for navigation. Since the beginning of aviation, the operation of aircraft posed problems of an analogous nature to that of marine traffic, hence the necessity of the establishment of specific institutions similar to the already existing institutions for marine traffic. In some cases, particular marine institutions took on the responsibility of regulating and controlling aviation. Later, the growth of aviation led to the creation of autonomous registers and national authorities dealing with aircraft and air navigation. 3.2.2 Tasks of Airworthiness Authorities From a general point of view, an airworthiness authority has the following tasks: 1 To prescribe airworthiness requirements and procedures. In the following chapters, we will deal with these prescriptions, ranging from aircraft type certification, construction, and operation to the relevant organizations. 2 To inform the interested parties regarding the above-mentioned prescriptions. This is performed in different ways. The Authority publishes technical regulations, technical standards, circulars, etc., which can be obtained on request or by other means. At present, a lot of information can be found on the Internet. 3 To control aeronautical material, design, manufacturing organizations, and aircraft operators. This is to ensure that all pertinent prescriptions are complied with. Control can be performed in different ways, with the appropriate involvement of the relevant Authority. 4 To certify aeronautical material and organizations. This is to declare in a legal form compliance with the applicable requirements of an aircraft or part of it, or a change to a type certificate, the capability of an organization, and so on. 3.3 The Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) The Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) is an associated body of the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) 2, representing the civil aviation regulatory authorities of several European states that have agreed to cooperate in developing and implementing common safety regulatory standards and procedures. The JAA's work started in 1970 (when it was known as the Joint Airworthiness Authorities). The aim was to develop a harmonized airworthiness standard to meet the needs of the industry in Europe, particularly for products manufactured by international consortia. Since 1987, joint aviation authority activities have been extended to operations, maintenance, and licensing and certification design standards for all classes of aircraft. joint aviation authority membership is based on the approval of the joint aviation authority Arrangements that the State Members signed in 1990 in Cyprus. Membership is open to the ECAC's members, who currently consist of 41 countries. The joint aviation authority has a two-phase membership system. The current procedures start with a familiarisation visit by a 'candidate' authority to the Central joint aviation authority (CJAA). After a satisfactory conclusion, the Authority can formally apply for membership, expressing its willingness to commit itself to the terms and commitments in the Arrangements. If the application is accepted, the Authority becomes a 'candidate member' and will have access to meetings, documentation, etc., without voting rights. Full membership is achieved after the JAA's satisfactory evaluations of the candidate member according to established procedures. The joint aviation authority currently consists of 33 full members and six candidate members. The JAA's objectives and functions may be summarized as follows based on the Arrangements and related commitments. 3.3.1 Objectives 1 Aviation safety. To ensure that joint aviation authority members achieve a high, consistent level of aviation safety through cooperation among Member States. 2 Transition from the joint aviation authority to the EASA. To ensure the highest level of contribution to the European Union for establishing an Aviation Safety Agency that absorbs all functions and activities of the joint aviation authority in as short a time as possible and ensures the full participation of joint aviation authority non-EU Members. 3 Business effectiveness. To achieve a cost-effective safety system that contributes to efficient civil aviation. 4 Consolidation of common standards. To contribute to fair and equal competition within Member States through the uniform application of common standards and through regular revision of existing regulations. Worldwide aviation safety improvement. Cooperate with other regional organizations or national authorities of states who play an important role in civil aviation to reach at least the joint aviation authority safety level and foster the worldwide implementation of harmonized safety standards and requirements through the conclusion of international arrangements. 3.3.2 Functions 1 To develop and adopt Joint Aviation Requirements (JARs) in aircraft design and manufacture, aircraft operations and maintenance, and the licensing of aviation personnel. 2 To develop administrative and technical procedures for implementing the JARs. 3 To implement JARs and the related administrative and technical procedures in a coordinated manner. 4 To adopt measures to ensure, whenever possible, that pursuance of the joint aviation authority safety objective does not unreasonably distort competition between the aviation industries of the Member States or place companies of Member States at a competitive disadvantage with companies of non-member States. 5 To provide the principal center of professional expertise in Europe on harmonizing aviation safety regulations. 6 To cooperate on harmonizing requirements and procedures with other safety regulatory authorities, particularly the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 3.3.3 Organization of the joint aviation authority The governing body runs the joint aviation authority system, which includes the joint aviation authority Board (JAAB) and the joint aviation authority Committee (JAAC), which work closely together. The joint aviation authority Board comprises the Director Generals of Civil Aviation and an appropriate European Community representation. The functions of the joint aviation authority Board are to determine the JAA's general policy and long-term strategy and to control its finances. The joint aviation authority Committee comprises representatives of National Aviation Authorities and the European Commission. It makes technical decisions concerning products, services, organizations, and people in all the JAA's fields of competence. It controls the Executive and reports to the joint aviation authority Board as specified in the Arrangements. The Committee also has an Executive Board of seven members selected by the joint aviation authority Committee, one of whom is the seat of the EASA. The board meets more regularly to decide day-to-day matters, prepare work for the full Committee, and make provisional decisions. A Chief Executive heads the CJAA staff. The joint aviation authority deals with almost all aviation safety problems except for air traffic control. In Europe, air traffic control is coordinated by EUROCONTROL, an organization that maintains close relations with the JAA. 3.3.4 Transition from the joint aviation authority to the european union aviation safety agency With the adoption of Regulation (EC) No. 1592/2002, the national regulation for EU Member States has been replaced by EU Regulation. Also, all certification tasks have been transferred from the national authorities (NA) to the EASA. Non-EU states retain their accountability in all fields. While the european union aviation safety agency is building its organization, the joint aviation authority continues to exist, ensuring the highest level of contribution to the EASA, subsequently absorbing all its functions and activities. Since 2002, the joint aviation authority has actively participated in the transition to the european union aviation safety agency by developing, in consultation with the Commission, a transition plan focused on regulatory aspects. On 28 November 2003, the european union aviation safety agency signed the Cyprus arrangement, becoming a full member of the JAA. This arrangement allowed the european union aviation safety agency to simplify the relationship with the JAA, with the potential to act in the name of all EU Member States. Within this new framework, the joint aviation authority maintains all its functions and responsibilities in operation and licensing while acting as a service provider to the european union aviation safety agency in certification and maintenance. 3.3.5 The Future of the joint aviation authority A set of options for the future of JAA/EASA relations was discussed during the ECAC's 51st Special Meeting of Director Generals of Civil Aviation (DGCA) in Yalta from 30 August to 2 September 2002. It was decided that the so-called Option 3, by which the regulatory and certification activity would be conducted within the european union aviation safety agency system but with transparency to the non-EASA Member States for the relevant decisions, offered the best prospects for the transition period. It was also agreed that Option 4 should be the ultimate goal, under which joint aviation authority activities would fully integrate with the EASA. In light of the above decisions, the joint aviation authority Board took the initiative to develop a 'roadmap' for establishing clear milestones for its medium-term activities. Accordingly, a working group on the Future of the joint aviation authority (FUJA) was established to develop this roadmap under clearly defined objectives. The main objective of the FUJA working group was to produce a detailed document regarding the future of the joint aviation authority (the so-called roadmap), inclusive of a precise indication as to when, where, and how each activity performed by the joint aviation authority would be transferred or disbanded (milestones), and to consider the most suitable means to continue the association with non-EU ECAC states in ongoing safety-related activities in Europe. The final report was presented to the ECAC Director Generals at their Special Meeting on 26 August 2005 in Romania, at which time the report and the main decisions were adopted. 3.3.6 General remarks The activity of this worthy organization, which is to be replaced by the EASA, has often been limited by its nature. It is worth mentioning that we are talking about authorities, not Authority. This means that the joint aviation authority did not have the legal status of an authority and, therefore, a legally recognized power. They did not have the power, for example, to issue certificates. Instead, they could only recommend the release of such certificates under the relevant terms and conditions to the national authorities. For the same reasons, they could not impose rules and procedures – unless they became European directives – but only 'recommend' their implementation. The shortcomings of such a situation are clear, considering the various rules and laws in force in the Member States. This is why the institution of a true European authority was increasingly considered necessary. This is now a reality with the european union aviation safety agency institution, which has benefited from the JAA's substantial and complex work. 3.4 The European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) The european union aviation safety agency is an independent European Community body with a legal identity and autonomy in legal, administrative, and financial matters. This single Authority was created by the adoption of European Parliament and Council Regulation (EC) No. 1592/2002 of 15 July 2002 to establish a Community system of air safety and environmental regulation. The EASA's activity started, as planned, on 28 September 2003. After a transitory period in Brussels, the Agency has now moved to Cologne (Germany). 3.4.1 Main tasks 1 To assist the European Commission in preparing legislation and support the Member States and industry in implementing the legislation. 2 To assist the European Commission in monitoring the application of European Community legislation. 3 To adopt its own certification specification and guidance material, conduct technical inspections, and issue certificates where centralized action is more efficient. The Agency will develop its know-how in all the fields of aviation safety and environmental protection to assist Community legislators in the issuing of common rules for: 1 The certification of aeronautical products, parts, and appliances. 2 The approval of organizations and personnel engaged in the maintenance of these products. 3 The approval of air operations. 4 The licensing of aircrew. 5 The safety oversight of airports and air traffic services operators. The EASA, as a body of the European Community, is subject to the provisions of the Financial Regulations applicable to the general budget of the European Communities. The european union aviation safety agency Financial Regulations and the relevant directives relating to the coordination of procedures for the awarding of public contracts. 3.4.2 european union aviation safety agency partnerships The european union aviation safety agency works closely with representatives of other organizations to ensure that it takes their views into account: 1 Interested parties in industry, which are subject to rules drafted by the EASA, are pivotal in ensuring the success of civil aviation safety standards by assisting in the drafting and correctly applying European Community and european union aviation safety agency rules. 2 European aviation authorities perform a critical role in assisting the european union aviation safety agency with the performance of its core rulemaking, certification, and standardization functions. International aviation organizations, such as the Joint Aviation Authorities, EUROCONTROL, and the International Civil Aviation Organization, work with the european union aviation safety agency to promote international civil aviation standards. 4 International aviation authorities, such as the Federal Aviation Administration, Transport Canada, DAC/CTA (Brazil), and the Interstate Aviation Committee (Russia), work with the european union aviation safety agency to ensure compliance with international standards and to facilitate trade in aero-nautical products. 5 Accident investigation bodies issue safety recommendations and analyses that guide the Agency's safety strategy. 3.4.3 Structure of the european union aviation safety agency The european union aviation safety agency Headquarters includes: 1 Executive Directorate 2 Rulemaking Directorate 3 Certification Directorate 4 Quality and Standardization Directorate 5 Administrative Directorate. The Agency's Management Board appoints the Executive Director. This Board, which brings together representatives of the Member States' authorities and the Commission, is responsible for defining the Agency's priorities, establishing the budget, and monitoring the Agency's operation.4 The Rulemaking Directorate contributes to producing all EU legislation and implementing material regulating civil aviation safety and environmental compatibility. It submits opinions to the European Commission and must be consulted by the Commission on any technical question in its field of competence. It is also in charge of international cooperation. Experts within the Rulemaking Directorate directly contact all relevant stakeholders and use the knowledge available within the industry and national administrations across the European Union. The agency's team of experts is comprised of people with a recognized background in aviation and community regulations. Currently, the Basic Regulation establishes Community competence only for regulating the airworthiness and environmental compatibility of aeronautical products, parts, and appliances. Work is underway to extend the scope of this regulation to encompass the regulation of pilot licensing, air operations, and third-country aircraft. It is also envisaged that the scope of the Basic Regulation be extended to the safety regulation of airport operations and air traffic control services. The Certification Directorate. On 28 September 2003, the Agency took over responsibility for the airworthiness and environmental certification of all aeronautical products, parts, and appliances designed, manufactured, maintained, or used by persons under the regulatory oversight of EU Member States. The Agency's certification work also includes all post-certification activities, such as the approval of changes to and repairs of aeronautical products and their components and the issuance of Airworthiness Directives to correct any potentially unsafe situation. Therefore, all types of certificates are now issued by the European Aviation Safety Agency and are valid throughout the European Union. On the same date, the Agency became the competent Authority to approve and oversee the organizations involved in the design of aeronautical products, parts, and appliances. It also carries out the same role for foreign organizations involved in manufacturing or maintaining such products. To execute its tasks while building up its resources, the Agency relies on national aviation authorities, who have historically filled this role and concluded contractual arrangements. The Quality and Standardization Directorate. Where Community law is implemented at the Member State level, the Agency assists the Commission in overseeing its effective application and uniform understanding. Therefore, the necessary standards are being developed and maintained properly, uniformly, and consistently across the European Union. Accordingly, the Agency conducts inspections of undertakings and national authorities throughout the EU to monitor the application of EU rules on aviation safety and assess their effectiveness. The Agency also provides technical training, which is essential to achieving overall consistency. The Administrative Directorate supports the Agency's operational activities. Its role is to help the Agency plan and manage its resources within the limits set out in the regulatory framework. The Directorate's specialists deal with human resource issues, budgeting and finance, infrastructure, legal affairs, and procurement. 3.4.4 european union aviation safety agency certification 3.4.4.1 Design approval The Certification Directorate is responsible for the management of all applications for design approval and for the issue of related certificates or approvals. It may use either internal or external resources to deal with technical investigations. According to Regulation (EC) No. 1592, the european union aviation safety agency takes responsibility for the design approval of products, parts, and appliances designed, manufactured, or used by persons under the regulatory oversight of EU Member States, except for those excluded by its Annex II.5 The European Commission then adopted Regulation (EC) 1702/2003, which specifies inter alia the requirements applicable to products, parts, and appliances and also provides for the grandfathering of pre-existing certificates under conditions that aim at ensuring that they meet the level of safety required by the Basic Regulation (EC) No. 1592/2002 and its rules of implementation. Consequently, only the products that comply with one of the provisions below are deemed to have been issued a type certificate compliant with Regulation (EC) No. 1592/2002 unless the Agency determines differently: 1 Product certificated in accordance with the joint aviation authority rules and procedures. 2 Products certificated by a Member State, acting as the State of Design, on the basis of a well-known airworthiness code. 3 Products certificated by a Member State in the framework of a bilateral agreement with the State of Design on the basis of that State's airworthiness codes. Products that do not benefit from these grandfathering provisions will remain under the national administration's oversight until the Agency has determined their type certificates. This will be done by 28 March 2007. Though the european union aviation safety agency is directly responsible for type certifications, at present, some certification tasks can be executed by the national authorities to ease the necessary period of transition. In relation to the products already type certificated, the Agency will expedite, in cooperation with the concerned Member States of design, the review of the type certification bases of these products with the view to determine their european union aviation safety agency type certificate and thus take over responsibility for their continued airworthiness. Aircraft that were permitted to fly before 20 September 2003 and cannot be issued an EASA-type certificate will remain under the responsibility of the Member State of Registry under applicable national regulations. 3.4.4.2 Organization approval The Certification Directorate is responsible for: 1 The management of all applications for Design Organization Approval, 7 The issue of related certificates and their continued surveillance. 2 The management of all applications from non-EU countries (or from EU countries on the request of the competent Authority) for Production Organization Approval, the issue of related certificates, and their continued surveillance. The management of all applications from non-EU countries for maintenance and maintenance training organization approval. All EU production, maintenance, and maintenance training organizations are approved by the local competent Authority in accordance with the rules of implementation. 3.4.4.3General remarks At the end of 2004, the european union aviation safety agency was still in the organization phase. According to Flight International (October 2004): The european union aviation safety agency is currently engaged in extending its powers beyond its existing responsibility for airworthiness and maintenance into the operations arena. According to approved plans for centralizing all aviation safety rulemaking, the european union aviation safety agency is preparing to assume responsibility for operational issues, including air traffic management, airports, and pilots, mirroring the US Federal Aviation Administration. Mr Goudou9used a speech to the European Parliament to address claims from several national aviation authorities that supplementary national requirements licensing will continue to be enforced in the future. But, unlike the predecessor, the Joint Aviation Authorities, the european union aviation safety agency will not merely recommend regulations. As an EU executive agency, the European Commission will have the power to enforce compliance. In spite of Mr. Goudou's goodwill, in the same article, Flight International mentioned that the european union aviation safety agency had a setback in its recruitment of 95 certification staff by the end of 2004, mainly because of the Agency's move from Brussels to Cologne, which could not be considered attractive for experienced people living in other locations. In any case, it is worth reading what Goudou wrote in an article (for a UVS International Publication): During the set-up and transition phase, the keyword of the Agency's activities is 'continuity.' Indeed, it goes without saying that the Agency is not going to reinvent the wheel, as its initial tasks are based on the activities and existing procedures of the Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) and on national know-how, which enables the Agency to provide continuity in terms of the certification work and the progressive resumption, without major upheaval, of the work carried out now by the joint aviation authority and national authorities. As such, no project has been delayed since the Agency has become operational. The future will tell if the choice of having all the certification staff in Cologne is the right one. In a further development, in a letter to Flight International (December 2004), Gerd Muehlbauer10 proposed the institution of regional european union aviation safety agency offices: This would allow technical resources from national airworthiness authorities to be used and would suit those who are unwilling to move to the EASA's office in Cologne. The federal aviation administration approach works, financed by the ticket fee, with its headquarters in Washington and regional offices around the nation strategically located close to the industry. 3.5 The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 3.5.1 Origins The Air Commerce Act of 20 May 1926 was the cornerstone of the Federal government's regulation of civil aviation. This landmark legislation was passed at the behest of the aviation industry, whose leaders believed the aircraft could not reach its full commercial potential without Federal action to improve and maintain safety standards. The Act charged the Secretary of Commerce with fostering air commerce, issuing and enforcing air traffic rules, licensing pilots, certificating aircraft, establishing airways, and operating and maintaining airborne integrated data system to air navigation. A new Aeronautics Branch of the Department of Commerce assumed primary responsibility for aviation oversight. 3.5.2 Early responsibility In fulfilling its civil aviation responsibilities, the Department of Commerce initially concentrated on functions such as safety rulemaking and the certification of pilots and aircraft. In 1934, the Aeronautics Branch was renamed the Bureau of Air Commerce to reflect its enhanced status within the Department. As commercial flying increased, the Bureau encouraged a group of airlines to establish the first three centers to provide air traffic control (ATC) along the airways. In 1936, the Bureau itself took over the centers and began to expand the air traffic control system. 3.5.3 The Civil Aeronautics Act In 1938, the Civil Aeronautics Act transferred the Federal civil aviation responsibilities from the Commerce Department to a new independent agency, the Civil Aeronautics Authority. In 1940, President Franklin Roosevelt split the Authority into two agencies: the Civil Aeronautics Administration (CAA) and the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). The civil aviation authority was responsible for ATC, airman and aircraft certification, safety enforcement, and airway development. The CAB was entrusted with safety rulemaking, accident investigation, and economic regulation of the airlines. Both organizations were part of the Department of Commerce. 3.5.4 The Birth of the federal aviation administration The approaching introduction of jet airliners and a series of mid-air collisions spurred the passage of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958. This legislation transferred the CAA's functions to a new independent body, the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA), that had broader Authority to combat aviation hazards. The Act took safety rulemaking from the CAB and entrusted it to the new FAA. It also gave the federal aviation administration sole responsibility for developing and maintaining a common civil-military system of air navigation and air traffic control, a responsibility the civil aviation authority previously shared with others. 3.5.5 From Agency to Administration In 1966, Congress authorized the creation of a cabinet department that would combine major Federal transportation responsibilities. This new Department of Transportation (DOT) began full operations on 1 April 1967. On that day, the federal aviation administration became one of several modal organizations within the DOT and was given a new name, the Federal Aviation Administration. At the same time, the CAB's accident investigation function was transferred to the new National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). 3.5.6 Structural changes The FAA's organizational structure has continued to evolve since its creation. The Agency's first Administrator favored a management system under which officials in Washington exercised direct control over programs in the field. In 1961, however, his successor began a decentralization process that transferred much Authority to regional organizations. This pattern generally endured until a 1988 'straight-lining again charged managers at national headquarters with more direction of field activities. 3.6 federal aviation administration activities 3.6.1 Safety regulations The federal aviation administration issues and enforces regulations and minimum standards covering manufacturing, operating, and maintaining aircraft. It also certifies airmen and airports that serve air carriers. 3.6.2 Airspace and traffic management The safe and efficient use of navigable Airspace is one of the FAA's primary objectives. The federal aviation administration operates a network of airport towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight service stations. It also develops air traffic rules, assigns the use of Airspace, and controls air traffic. 3.6.3 Air navigation facilities The federal aviation administration builds or installs visual and electronic airborne integrated data system for air navigation. It also maintains, operates, and assures the quality of these facilities and sustains other systems to support air navigation and air traffic control, including voice and data communications equipment, radar facilities, computer systems, and visual display equipment at flight service stations. 3.6.4 Civil Aviation Abroad The federal aviation administration promotes aviation safety, encourages civil aviation abroad, and takes part in international conferences. Aeronautical information is exchanged with foreign authorities. The federal aviation administration certifies foreign repair shops, airmen and mechanics, provides technical airport information desk and training, negotiates 'Bilateral Safety Agreements' (BASA) with other authorities with the 'Implementation Procedures for Airworthiness' (IPA) to allow and facilitate the mutual certification of aeronautical products which are imported or exported between the USA and a signatory country, as well as promoting technical cooperation in matters of airworthiness, including maintenance, flight operations, and environmental certification. The federal aviation administration deals with all the problems related to flight safety in the United States but has representatives on five continents committed to ensuring and promoting the safety, security, and efficiency of international civil aviation. The federal aviation administration engages in dialog with its counterparts in 188 countries and works closely with the ICAO. This effort includes providing technical assistance and training, ensuring that countries with airlines flying to the USA meet international standards, and harmonizing global standards so that passengers can benefit from a seamless air transportation network. It is clear that all these international activities have the final and institutional purpose of guaranteeing flight safety in the USA. However, we cannot ignore the considerable drive given by the federal aviation administration to the growth of safety on a global scale. 3.6.5 Commercial space transportation The federal aviation administration regulates and encourages the US commercial space transportation industry. It licenses commercial space launch facilities and private launches of space payloads on expendable launch vehicles. 3.6.6 Research, engineering, and development The federal aviation administration conducts Research on and develops the systems and procedures needed for a safe and efficient system of air navigation and air traffic control. It helps develop better aircraft, engines, and equipment and tests or evaluates aviation systems, devices, materials, and procedures. The federal aviation administration also carries out aero-medical Research. 3.6.7 Other programs The federal aviation administration registers aircraft and records documents reflecting title or interest in aircraft and their parts. It administers an aviation insurance program, develops specifications for aeronautical charts, and publishes information on airways, airport services, and other technical subjects in aeronautics. 3.6.8 Summary of federal aviation administration activities The federal aviation administration is responsible for the safety of civil aviation. Its main roles include: 1 Regulating civil aviation to promote safety. 2 Encouraging and developing civil aeronautics, including new aviation technology. 3 Developing and operating a system of air traffic control and navigation for both civil and military aircraft. Researching and developing the National Airspace System and civil aeronautics. 4 5 Developing and carrying out programs to control aircraft noise and other environmental effects of civil aviation. 6 Regulating US commercial space transportation. 3.7 federal aviation administration certification The organization of the federal aviation administration is very complex; this is understandable considering the plurality of tasks, the size of the USA, and its relationship with the rest of the world. From an airworthiness point of view, we will try to describe which structure deals with each relevant issue. In the vast federal aviation administration organizational chart, we can find the Aviation Safety headquarters located in Washington, which, among its many offices (like the Office of Accident Investigation, Office of Aerospace Medicine, etc.), hosts the Aircraft Certification Service, structured as shown in Figure 3.3. Figure 3.4 summarizes the main tasks of this Service. 3.7.1 The Aircraft Certification Service The Aircraft Certification Service administers the type certification program to determine compliance with the prescribed regulations and to maintain certificate integrity (continued airworthiness). The Service is composed of three headquarters divisions, four certifications directorates, an International Airworthiness Program Staff, and an Aircraft Certification Division located in Brussels, Belgium. The Aircraft Certification Service's responsibility for administering the Federal Aviation Regulations is divided as follows:12 1 The Aircraft Engineering Division is responsible for overall policy and guidance for engineering portions of the Aircraft Certification Regulatory Program (ACRP). Furthermore, it is responsible for FAR 21, 39, and all Special FARs14pertaining to type certification. 2 The Production and Airworthiness Certification Division is responsible for the overall policy and guidance for manufacturing and airworthiness certification portions of the Aircraft Certification Regulatory Program. It is also responsible for FAR 21, 43, 45, 183, and all Special FARs pertaining to certification conformity, airworthiness certification, and production. 3 The Planning and Program Management Division is responsible for the coordination of the Service's strategic and tactical planning initiatives and processes. It is also responsible for Service technical, general, and managerial training requirements, administrative and program management guidance, coordination, and support for Service headquarters organizations. 4 The Small Airplane Directorate (Central Region) is responsible for FAR 23, 31, technical guidance for FAR 23 Restricted category airplanes; airworthiness standard for gliders and airships, and technical guidance for Primary category airplanes; FAR 23, glider and airship import TC projects from Europe, Africa, and Israel. 5 The Transport Airplane Directorate (Northwest Mountain Region) is responsible for FAR 25 and technical guidance for FAR 25, Restricted category airplanes, and FAR 25, import TC projects from Europe, Africa, and Israel. 6 The Rotorcraft Directorate (Southwest Region) is responsible for FAR 27 and 29, technical guidance for FAR 27 and 29 Restricted category rotorcraft, powered-lift aircraft, and guidance for primary category aircraft; FAR 27 and 29 import TC projects from Europe, Africa, and Israel. 7 The Engine and Propeller Directorate (New England Region) is responsible for FAR 33 and 35, as well as technical guidance on auxiliary power units (APUs). The Service also has other functions: 1 The International Airworthiness Program Staff (AIR-4) is responsible for policy guidance on bilateral agreements, import and export of aeronautical products, and other international airworthiness issues, programs, and procedures. 2 Aircraft Certification Offices (ACOs). Each Directorate incorporates three or more ACOs within their geographical areas, issuing the actual certification of aircraft and products. They work directly with the applicant and provide the main interface between the public and the FAA. 3 Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG). A Flight Standards group is co-located with each Directorate, and it is responsible for determining operational acceptability and continuing airworthiness requirements for newly certified or modified aircraft, engines, and propellers intended to be operated under the provisions of the FARs. We will now describe in more detail the four Directorates mentioned above. 3.7.2 The Small Airplane Directorate The Small Airplane Directorate (Central Region) consists of the Directorate headquarters located in Kansas City; four Aircraft Certification Offices (ACO) located in Anchorage, Atlanta, Chicago, and Wichita; and seven Manufacturing Inspection District Offices (MIDOs)16located in Atlanta, Cleveland, Kansas City, Minneapolis, Orlando, Vandalia, and Wichita. The primary functions of the Directorate headquarters in Kansas City are to: 1 Provide administrative support and resource management for the Directorate field offices. 2 Develop type certification policies and regulations for small airplanes, airships, and balloons, and ensure standardized application of the policies and regulations. 3 Administer type certification of small airplanes, airships, and balloons in field offices outside the Directorate. 4 Monitor service difficulty information and process airworthiness actions for small airplanes, airships, and balloons. The Small Airplane Directorate is responsible for several aspects of aviation, such as: 1 Continued airworthiness and general aviation safety 2 Type certification 3 Technical Standard Orders (TSO) 4 Parts manufacturer approval (PMA) 5 Field approval. 3.7.3 The Transport Airplane Directorate The Transport Airplane Directorate (Northwest Mountain Region), functionally, has oversight responsibility for transport category airplane design approvals and modifications worldwide, as well as oversight responsibility for over 900 production approval holders. The Transport Airplane Directorate works closely with other federal aviation administration offices throughout the country and with foreign regulatory authorities to accomplish this goal. Among the federal aviation administration offices working with the Directorate, it is worth mentioning: 1 The Aircraft Certification Services (ACOs; in Seattle, Los Angeles, and Denver). 2 The Manufacturing Inspection District Offices (MIDOs; in Renton, WA, Phoenix, AZ, Lakewood, CA, and Van Nuys, CA) – one Certificate Management Office in Renton, WA, with Certificate Management Units in Everett, WA, Renton, WA, Auburn, WA, and Long Beach, CA. The Directorate relies on Designated Representatives18of the Administrator to act on behalf of the FAA. This Designee force includes Engineering Designees, Manufacturing Designees, and Organization Designees. The Directorate's three most important responsibilities are: 1 Continued operational safety 2 Regulations and policy for all transport category airplanes 3 Design, production, and airworthiness certification. 3.7.3.1 Continued operational safety 1 Monitoring the transport category airplane fleet to ensure that airplanes continue to meet regulations and are safe throughout their operational life cycle. 2 Looking for conditions that affect the safety of airplanes. This is done by surveillance, inspection, review, investigation, and analysis of service difficulties, incidents, and accidents. If an unsafe condition is identified, this will trigger the following actions: 3 (a) Work with the manufacturers to mandate corrective action through Airworthiness Directives (ADs) or (b) Revision of regulations/policy, or (c) Issuing of new regulations/policy. 4 Performing surveillance and oversight of production approval holders. 3.7.3.2 Regulations and policy for all transport airplanes 1 Developing and establishing FAA-type design and airworthiness standards for all transport category airplanes. 2 The type design standards are codified in Title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR), Part 25. This is commonly referred to as Part 25 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR). 3 These FAR 25 standards are applied to aircraft worldwide, working with other civil aviation authorities to 'harmonize' these standards whenever possible. 3.7.3.3 Design, production, and airworthiness certification 1 The Directorate is responsible for the release of design, production, and airworthiness approvals of all aircraft and aircraft parts in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Colorado, Wyoming, California, Arizona, Utah, Nevada, Hawaii, and the Pacific Rim countries. 2 Determining if and ensuring that each aircraft design meets the applicable regulations (design certification). When an applicant shows that its aircraft design meets the standards, a type certificate is issued. 4 Ensuring that each manufacturing facility is capable of producing aircraft to the approved design (production certification). 5. Ensuring that each aircraft produced in the manufacturing facility is built according to the approved design. 6 Ensuring that each aircraft produced is in a condition for safe operation (airworthiness certification). 3.7.4 The Rotorcraft Directorate The Rotorcraft Directorate (Southwest Region) approves the design and production of all aircraft manufactured or modified in Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana for those seeking a type certificate, Supplemental type certificate, parts manufacturer approval, or a Technical Standard Order approval. In addition to certifying all aircraft, the Directorate has the responsibility for writing rules and policies for rotorcraft and working with all the Aircraft Certification Offices (ACOs) – also outside the above-mentioned territory – to achieve standardized application of the rules for rotorcraft. Furthermore, it works with its counterparts in other countries to issue domestic approvals for foreign-manufactured rotorcraft. The Rotorcraft Directorate has one Manufacturing Inspection District Office (MIDO) in Oklahoma City and one in San Antonio. The rest of the Directorate, which includes three Aircraft Certification Offices (ACOs), a Manufacturing Inspection District Office (MIDO), the Directorate Staff, and the necessary administrative support and management, is located in the Southwest Regional Office, 2601 Meacham Blvd, Fort Worth, TX 76193. 1 Of the three Aircraft Certification Offices, two certify the engineering design of airplanes, and one certifies rotorcraft. 2 The Manufacturing Inspection District Offices certify the production aspects of all products. 3 The Rotorcraft Standards Staff writes rules/policy and establishes standardized application of the rotorcraft certification rules and 4 The necessary administrative support staff and management to operate the organization. 3.7.5 The Engine and Propeller Directorate The Engine and Propeller Directorate (New England Region) is located in Burlington, MA. It is responsible for original type certification or changes to approved designs of aircraft engines and propellers in addition to Technical Standard Order (TSO) approvals of auxiliary power units (APUs). The Engine and Propeller Directorate (E&PD) is responsible for developing rules, policies, and guidance for these products and assures standardization across all federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Offices (ACOs) that perform certification work on these products. The E&PD Standards Staff is the working element of the E&PD that directly carries out these functions. The Engine Certification Office (ECO) and each of the Aircraft Certification Offices (ACOs) that perform E&PD-related certification work are accountable for planning, directing, and controlling engine and propeller type certification programs in addition to technical standard order approvals of auxiliary power units. Both the ECOs and ACOs' primary responsibilities are to find compliance with the applicable Airworthiness Standards (i.e., FAR 33 and 35 and TSO-C77B) and assure the continued airworthiness of these products once in Service. The Manufacturing Inspection Office (MIO) is responsible for assuring aviation parts are manufactured to approved standards and issuing production certificates to manufacturers in accordance with the requirements of FAR 21. 3.8'One world, one goal: aviation safety In this chapter, in dealing with the JAA, we have emphasized the necessity of having a legally recognized European authority in place. In fact, in spite of the huge amount of work accomplished in the unification of regulations and procedures in Europe, the joint aviation authority did not have the Authority to impose these rules. The european union aviation safety agency now has this power and can perform as a single authority. For instance, once an aircraft is type certificated by the EASA, this type of certificate is valid for all the Member States, without being just a 'recommendation' for the issue of a national type certificate. Today, we have a single European Agency instead of 25 national authorities and a single certificate for aeronautical products instead of 25. Another shortcoming of the joint aviation authority was the complexity of bilateral agreements with authorities like the federal aviation administration or Transport Canada. For example, an Airbus certificated by the joint aviation authority could be accepted in the United States only when it was in possession of a type certificate issued by a European Member State. The joint aviation authority has carried out long and complex work with the federal aviation administration and Transport Canada for the release of new bilateral agreements, also relating to single European Member States. The new legal reality requires European Member States to comply with European Law; they cannot deviate from common European rules, impose additional requirements, or conclude agreements with third countries. As a consequence, Member States are represented by the EASA. Furthermore, Member States are bound by and must reflect the Agency's decisions and positions when carrying out their representative roles in frameworks like the international civil aviation organization and ECAC. The Agency is committed to establishing proper relations with non-EU members of the ECAC and to pursuing relationships with other international partners through special arrangements, associations, partnerships, and mutual recognition agreements. It must also recognize that, legally, bilateral safety agreements are a competence of the European Commission. At present, although the european union aviation safety agency has already agreed to some working arrangements with a certain number of non-EU states (Brazil, Canada, China, Israel, Russia, and the USA), no bilateral agreement has been formalized. Therefore, from a strictly legal point of view, the existing bilateral agreements of the EU Member States are still in force. In this context, the european union aviation safety agency is carrying on the tradition of an annual US-–Europe International Aviation Safety Conference. The Europe–US Aviation Safety Conference has been taking place for 50 years to promote cooperation and mutual recognition of safety standards. The Europe–US International Aviation Safety Conference on 7–9 June 2005 was jointly organized by the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), the Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA), and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) of the USA. For many years, this event provided a forum for open discussion between the JAA, other civil aviation authorities, and industry representatives on current initiatives and strategic directions. Today, this annual conference also provides a forum for interested parties to participate in harmonization and safety enhancement activities and to present initiatives of their own to the global community. More than 350 high-level aviation experts from all over the world continuing airworthines management exposition together in Cologne, Germany, to discuss future trends in aviation safety. Under the title' Aviation Safety Regulation –Setting the Sights for the Future', this conference hosted by the european union aviation safety agency focused on bilateral agreements and future regulation in aviation safety. In opening the conference, Patrick Goudou, Executive Director of the EASA, said: Our mission is to set and achieve the highest common standards of safety and environmental protection in civil aviation. I am confident we can achieve our goals through international cooperation and a strong partnership with the United States in particular. Notes 1 This can be considered as part of an aviation authority dealing with airworthiness. 2 The ECAC (European Civil Aviation Conference) was founded in 1955 as an intergovernmental organization. The ECAC's objective is to promote the continued development of a safe, efficient, and sustainable European air transport system. In so doing, the ECAC seeks to harmonize civil aviation policies and practices amongst its Member States and promote understanding of policy matters between its Member States and other parts of the world. Close liaisons are maintained with the ICAO, EUROCONTROL (see note 3), and the JAA. 3 EUROCONTROL has the role of coordinating the development of a uniform system of Air Traffic Management (ATM) throughout Europe (41 states), working with its partners in the air transport industry to provide a range of services, from air traffic controller training to managing air traffic flow, from regional control of Airspace to development of innovative technologies and procedures. 4 The Advisory Body of Interested Parties assists the Management Board in this work. It comprises organizations representing aviation personnel, manufacturers, commercial and aviation operators, the maintenance industry, training organizations, and air sports. 5 Aircraft for which a type certificate or a certificate of airworthiness has not been issued on the basis of this european union aviation safety agency Regulation and its implementing rules. (Generally, aircraft with a special certificate of airworthiness, as defined in Chapter 8, as well as ultralights) 6 See Chapter 5, 'Instructions for continued airworthiness'. 7 See Chapter 5, 'Design Organization Approval'. 8 See Chapter 7, 'Production Organization Approval'. 9 Patrick Goudou, Executive Director of the EASA. 10 President of MT Propeller Entwicklung. 11 This is another proposal following the US system where the federal aviation administration is supported by '$1 per airline ticket'. This is why the federal aviation administration does not charge for certification. 'To charge fees for certification could kill small and medium enterprises in aviation, especially in general aviation.' 12 Details on the quoted FARs can be found in Chapter 4. 13 The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 directs the federal aviation administration to promote the safety of flight of civil aircraft in air commerce, prescribing and revising minimum standards for design, materials, construction, etc. The ACRP was developed to accomplish this goal. 14 Special FARs establish additional airworthiness standards for aircraft to cope (normally) with particular operations. For instance, Special FAR No. 23 is for aircraft to be certificated in the Normal category for a reciprocating or turbopropeller multi-engine-powered small airplane that is to be certificated to carry more than 10 occupants and that is intended for use in operations under FAR 135. 15 See Chapter 8. 16 MIDOs assist with production approval and certification (manufacturing), airworthiness certification, manufacturing facilities approval holder issues, manufacturing designee oversight, and support to ACOs during design approvals. 17 Field approval is a maintenance performance approval for a major repair or alteration that is performed by a Flight Standards Service Aviation Safety Inspector. 18 A Designee is a representative of the federal aviation administration Administrator authorized by law to examine, test, and/or make inspections necessary to issue airman or aircraft certificates. 19 See Chapter 5, 'Type certification of imported products'.