Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 10 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification DO-200B Aeronautical Data DO-200B, “Standards for Processing Aeronautical Data,” is a cornerstone within modern aviation. While DO-178 and DO-278 garner a greater portion of mindshare, DO-200B is the workhorse upon which all modern aircraft rely, both directly and indirectly. Why? Because DO-200B governs the means by which data necessary for safe aircraft operations is prepared, updated, utilized, and maintained. It is of no minor significance that DO-178 and DO-278 are explicitly termed guidelines as the term “Considerations”, not “Standard”, appears in each of their titles; conversely DO-200B is actually a minimum standard as stated in its title. Consider the following statements and assess whether they are true or false; answers and explanations are provided within this paper: 1. T / F: DO-200B applies to Terrain Data, Navigation Data and Engine Data. 2. T / F: DO-200B is a major rewrite of DO-200A. 3. T / F: The three basic DO-200B processes are Data Quality Requirements, Data Processing Requirements, and Quality 4. Management. 5. T / F: The Supplier is primarily responsible for ensuring data usage integrity. 6. T / F: A Type 1 Letter of Acceptance requires testing on the specified avionics end-item. 7. T / F: All Data Processing tools need to be qualified for Level 1 data. If the above questions were truly easy, congratulate yourself on your genuine expertise. If they simply seemed easy, then the information in this chapter that follows is for you. In fact, answering the above without understanding the overall data chain and quality assurance role in DO-200B is like understanding Fourier transforms without first understanding The Calculus: impossible for mere mortals … To summarize, DO-200B provides guidance for the following aeronautical aspects: Minimum standards and guidance for processing aeronautical data; “Aeronautical Data” = data used for navigation, flight planning, terrain awareness, flight simulators, etc.; Criteria for developing, changing, and supporting aeronautical data; Ultimately providing the user with assurance of data quality. Aeronautical Definition: First, what is the meaning of the term “aeronautical”? “Aeronautical” applies to more than just aircraft, air traffic control, training aids, and navigation. The term “aeronautical” was chosen accordingly because it is a superset of “aircraft. “Whereas DO-178 and DO-254 are intended for airborne software, DO-200B applies to data which may never be present in an aircraft but in some way influences aviation-related safety. This includes aircraft operations, simulation, training, planning, etc. Hence the term “Aeronautical.” Minimum Standards: DO-200B is a modest upgrade to DO-200A, with increased focused on the overall aeronautical data (200A was somewhat more “navigation” oriented), data security, aeronautical data chain, increased scope/definition of tool qualification and DO-330 and expanded definitions/clarity. DO-200B provides the “minimum” standards. The user is encouraged to, and often must, do more than the “minimum” guidance provide within DO-200B. Since aeronautical data can take on so many different forms, and the future of aviation will assuredly include data forms unknown today, DO-200B cannot possibly include sufficient details for each data type. A similar situation exists for software and hardware via DO-178 and DO-254: those standards apply to virtually all airborne avionics, from bathroom lights to thrust reversers to navigation systems; the added requirements for each system type are not addressed within them. However, for airborne avionics additional system-specific requirements are contained within other required certification documents such as Technical Standard Orders (TSO’s – please see the preceding technical standard order chapter for details). Unlike those airborne systems, additional data-specific aeronautical data requirements are largely unaddressed within supporting documents, with the notable exception of Advisory Circular (AC) 20-153B, “Acceptance of Aeronautical Data Processes and Associated Databases” which is freely available and is a must-read for all DO-200B practitioners. It is therefore imperative for users of DO-200B to remember the “minimum” standards are almost certainly insufficient for most projects: it is incumbent on the user to further elucidate additional standards criteria specific to their data and processes. DO-200B’s provides “recommended standards” as opposed to strict requirements. The document was developed by 245+ persons from around the world, principally from aviation product development companies but also inclusive of key certification authorities and military personnel. As with nearly all committee-based standards committees, DO-200B’s authors had to reconcile conflicting interests with an all-too-common desire to develop the impossibly perfect document, e.g. “all things to all people”. Thus DO-200B’s 77 pages apply to both large and small aeronautical data sets, different criticality levels, and different users. The prevailing concern is that “provable quality systems” outweigh “strict process steps” where aeronautical data is concerned. Each user must carefully consider and analyze their contribution to safety by asking the following questions for each step within their data chain: “Could their data usage fail to detect an error?” “Could their data usage insert an error?” “Could their data usage propagate an error?” “What are answers to the above questions considering the data development and usage ecosystem and toolchain?” Aeronautical Data & The Aviation Ecosystem DO-200B is part of the overall Aviation Development Ecosystem (a term coined by AFuzion), which includes airborne and ground-based software/systems combined with formalized Safety processes. The top four purposes of DO-200B are summarized as follows: ensure source data is not degraded in handling; ensure database is compatible with end equipment, ensure database is updated, current and valid; covers entire lifecycle from origination to acceptance and application by end-user. DO-200B requires planning, data requirements, processing requirements and proof of related processes; these items must then be validated and verified throughout the data-chain, beginning with data receipt and ending with data transmission. Both data Supplier and User share responsibility for ensuring data integrity. Required documents for a typical DO-200B activity are: Compliance plan DQR documentt Data processing Procedures document Tool qualification document Configuration Management document Competencies management document Quality Management system document The primary DO-200B plan is the Compliance Plan with this plan covering the following topics: Definition Data Quality Requirements DQR Definition Aeronautical Data Processing Requirements Definition Quality Management Requirements Identification Personel Responsible for Requirements Compliance Declaration of Standards Used Completed Compliance Matrix Aeronautical Data Definitions. This aviation world already has its own vocabulary, with the slang word“Avilish” previously introduced in a prior Chapter herein to mean “Aviation English”. DO-200B takes that one step further and introduces a number of key terms which have little contextual meaning outside the realm of aeronautical data as follows: Aeronautical Data: Data used for aeronautical application such as naviagation, flight planning, flight simulators, terrain awareness and other purposes, which comprises navigation data and terrain and obstacle data. Aeronautical database: aeronautical database is data that is stored electronically in a system that supports airborne, or ground based aeronautical applications. An aeronautical database may be updated at regular intervals. Assemble; the process of merging or compiling aeronautical data, sometimes from multiple data suppliers, into a database and establishing a baseline for subsequent processing. The assemble phase includes checking the data and ensuring that detected errors and omissions are rectified Assurance level: the degree of confidence that a data element is not corrupted while stored or in transit. This can be categorized intro three levels, 1, 2 and three. With 1 being the highest degree of confidence and 3 the lowest. Correct data: data meeting stating quality requirements Data quality: a degree or level of confidence that the data provided meet the requirements of the user. These requirements include levels of accuracy, resolution, assurance level, traceability, timeliness, completeness and format End-user: the last user in an aeronautical data chain, aeronautical data end-users are typically aircraft operators, airline planning departments, air traffic service providers, flight simulation providers, airframe manufacturers, system integrators, and regulatory authorities, usually responsible for data quality DO-200B compliance. Error: defective or degraded data elements or lost or misplaced data elements or data elements not meeting stated quality requirements Originator: the first organization in an aeronautical data chain that accepts responsibility for the data. For example, a State or radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-200B european organization for civil aviation equipment ED-76 compliant organization. Aeronautical Data Quality Attributes Aeronautical data has the following quality attributes, generally applicable for each data item or set: The Data Quality Attributes are summarized in the following 1 – Accuracy of data 2 – Resolution of data 3 – Provable prevention of corruption within ADC 4 - traceability the ability to determine the origin and correct defects 5 – validity of applied time-frame window of usage 6 – completeness of data – everything is there 7 – format; supplier format meets next users’ needs Data Accuracy and Relationship to DO-201: Prior to applying DO-200B, it is important to understand applicable data requirements and data origination; that is the purpose of DO-201, “Industry Requirements for Aeronautical Information”. DO-201 ensures quantified data accuracy, resolution, criticality, calculation, and procedures. Data accuracy requirements must be specified when applicable. For example, consider a Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range and Ranging. Each Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range and Ranging has a unique identify; that identity is simply a “name”, and the name must be exact (correlated to an actual Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range And Ranging with the same name). There are no accuracy requirements for a name. However, the same Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range and Ranging has a location and a height; both location and height have corresponding accuracy requirements and it is those accuracy requirements which must be known, measurable, and assessed. Resolution of Data: Aeronautical data often has associated resolution attributes. The required data must be specified, and it is based upon the intended use of that data. Often different preparers of aeronautical data do not fully understand the intended use of the data, so it is imperative that intended use be documented and known. Resolution only applies to items which can be measured such as aeronautical data. For example, in the preceding Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range And Ranging example, the Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range And Ranging name is an identifier and does not have a resolution attribute, whereas the location/height attributes are measurable, and those measurements must have documented resolution characteristics. Data resolution is defined (incorporated) into format of output data, per DO-201. However, if the data item is not covered in DO-201, then the user must perform a safety assessment on that data to determine appropriate resolution characteristics and document them. Assurance Levels versus Criticality Levels: Whereas DO-178, DO-254, et al. use associated criticality levels, DO-200B uses Assurance Levels 1, 2, or 3. DO-200B’s three assurance levels mean there are three different categories of data, with Level 1 being the most stringent. By using different assurance levels, less critical data items can undergo reduced certification aspects; thus, decreasing the time and budget associated with processing these less critical items. DO-200B’s compliance planning process must ensure key data integrity assurance activities are planned, performed, assessed, and recorded. To accomplish such DO-200B data compliance, the following six integral activities are necessary to be applied throughout all data development and deployment activities: 1 – data processing planning 2 – defining data quality requirements 3 – data processing 4 – data quality management 5 – ensuring compliance 6 – obtaining LOA DO-200B’s Quality Management System Whereas real-time aviation software and hardware system are carefully developed with safety-related aspects individually assessed, aeronautical data processing is almost always built around commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware and software for data processing. Since the development of such commercial off-the-shelf hardware and software cannot be subjected to aviation-grade internal scrutiny, aeronautical data compliance instead focuses upon the data processing framework developed explicitly for DO-200B but using such commercial off-the-shelf items. Like most high-quality data processing systems employed at financial institutions and factories, the use of a Quality Management System (QMS) is mandatory. DO-200B requires little additions to an already good quality management system so any provably good quality management system should suffice (with minor upgrades) for DO-200B. While hundreds of articles and many books exist on commercial quality management systems, the following summary of quality management system applies: 1 – the art and science of institutionalizing quality related activities throughout organization 2 – implementation of quality-practices to establish goals then continuously assess and improve 3 – implementation of formally defined processes with training for all involved persons to implement and monitor Therefore, a DO-200B compliant quality management system is necessary for eventual approval of the transmitted data. Most aviation data processing entities adopt commercial-grade quality management systems from international standard organization 9001, AS9115A, or CMMI Level 4 based systems. Attributes of a good quality management system, and certainly a DO-200B compliant quality management system, are depicted in the following: Ability to assess implementation versus plan Ability to prove defined procedures were followed as specified in the procedural framework Assess planned work performed versus written framework Assess review capability checklists for activities Revise any procedures which be able to prove compliance Define audit checklists Can you prove will be innocent instead of found guilty? Aeronautical Data Assurance Level Example: As an example, consider data associated with precision approaches. The safety assessment determined the availability of a precision approach capability would be less than a Hazardous condition but more than a Minor condition: a. Catastrophic b. Hazardous c. Major d. Minor e. No Effect Since “Major”, it is Assurance Level 2 for DO-200B. Data Traceability: DO-200B requires the defined ability to perform, and evidence to prove, thorough data traceability. Traceability for data means the ability to determine data origin. In most cases, aeronautical data users are not the originators of the data they use, manipulate, or propagate. There must be the ability to determine the source of any data error. Thus, there must be ability to trace data from any supplier to the next user and determine “root cause” of any error. When data is corrected, subsequent users must be notified of data errors and corrections. Timeframe, Completeness, & Format: Data must be verified to be valid, in terms of its associated timeframe, completeness, and format. If data such as runway locations/orientation has an associated usage period of 28-days, such a period must be specified for that data and validity determined accordingly. Data completeness attributes must also be specified; for example, if data is only for use by large aircraft, then runways shorter than 3,000 feet need not be included and the data set may be complete in the absence of such short runways. Data format must be specified to determine both validity and usage; this must be in consideration of the next user on the aeronautical data chain. For example, if airport elevation data consists of two items, 1) Elevation, and 2) A sign indicating “above” or ‘below” sea-level, then that relationship must be defined, and the data set (elevation and above/below sea level indicator) validated accordingly. Example of DO-200B Application: Typically, the starting point for aeronautical data is from an Aeronautical Data Supplier who has already qualified their data using DO-201 Standards for Aeronautical Information. The DO-201 compliant aeronautical database from the aeronautical data supplier typically includes all data available from the aeronautical charts. DO-200B then is used to extract data which the particular product requires in order to perform its intended function in flight which is only a small subset of the data provided by the supplier and satisfies the “Aeronautical Data Quality Attributes” discussed above. The data from the aeronautical database supplier is typically distributed every 28 day, for 13 cycles within a year. Much of the data contains date applicability of the data to permit changes to occur within a 28-day cycle. The DO-200B application then extracts data every 28 days from the much larger aeronautical database and distributes that data to the subscribers for data for the products they supply. DO-200B provides guidance on the qualification of the data extraction tool as well as guidance on the verification that needs to take place with each data extraction. To meet this dual goal, most avionics system suppliers qualify their data extraction tool only when that tool changes. The data extraction tool itself accomplishes the verification steps required for every 28-day cycle extraction. Therefore, artifacts are maintained for updates to the data extraction tool separately from the data retained every time the data extraction tool is run, typically every 28 days. This data retained every 28 days from the execution of the data extraction tool must then meet the Aeronautical Data Quality Attributes Specified above.