Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 5 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification The Aviation Development Ecosystem Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines Copyright © 2021 by Vance Hilderman All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in reviews and specific other non-commercial uses permitted by copyright law. ISBN: 978-1-950336-16-6 (eBook) ISBN: 978-1-950336-17-3 (Hardcover) This book contains information obtained from hundreds of different sources, all of which were deemed by the authors to be authentic and highly regarded. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish accurate and reliable data. However, the publisher and authors cannot assume responsibility for the validity of any data, materials, or the consequences of their usage. The reader is reminded that the aviation development and certification field is continually updated, and no published data can be 100% accurate the following day. The author and publisher have attempted to trace copyright holders of all materials and apologize to copyright holders if permission was not obtained; if any copyrighted material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we can correct such in any future reprint. Aviation Press International PO Box 811547 Los Angeles, California USA 90081 ARP4754A Aircraft & System Development More Non-Magic Numbers: 4754, 4761, 79 … As shown via ARP4761A for aviation safety assessments, Safety does not rely upon magic numbers but rather real answers. Likewise, Safety is never an accident, but true Safety should prevent accidents. The numbers “4754”,“4761”, and “79” are not magic but are associated with Safety. Safety and the Numbers have evolved – the new answers for Safety are found in 4754A and 4761A; specifically SAE’s ARP4754A (“ED-79” in Europe) and ARP4761A. The Old Days. You now know the “Old Days” of technology refer to any time prior to last year. In the Very Old Days (moon landings, space shuttles, commercial jets with four engines), safety was addressed by brains and refinement: smart engineers did their best to prevent accidents, then refinement was applied when those best efforts were less than perfect. In the Very Old days, computing horsepower was thinner, schedules were fatter, and acceptable safety generally ensued: space shuttles had a 98.5 percent chance of not exploding, and commercial aircraft had fatal crashes “only” a few times annually. Then, the very old days gave way to mere old days, and the very old ways didn’t work as well. Some said the engineers were not as smart, while others said those engineers were trying to make the computers too smart. However, all agreed that more formalized safety was needed, and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) had been handling Aerospace Recommended Practices (ARPs) for decades. society of automotive engineers ARP4754, Certification Considerations for Highly-Integrated or Complex Aircraft Systems, was published in November 1996. Its tightly-coupled sibling ARP4761, Guidelines and Methods for Conducting the Safety Assessment Process on Civil Airborne Systems and Equipment, was published the next month, December 1996. ARP4754A Today. The revised ARP4754A is officially titled “Guidelines for Development of Civil Aircraft And Systems.” It covers the development cycle for aircraft and avionics systems. Rarely can one judge a book by its cover or title; however, in this case, the title literally conveys a powerful message: if you are involved with the development of aircraft or systems, you should be well versed in ARP4754A’s guidelines.’ Why? There are two key points that should be understood before first opening the pages of ARP4754A: 1. ARP4754A’s title states “guidelines,” but failure to understand and apply ARP4754A may reduce safety and will greatly reduce your ability to achieve certification. The ability to demonstrate robust, safe avionics begins with the approach to systems safety before development. It is very difficult to apply retrospectively in order to rectify a weak system. 2. While its predecessor, ARP4754, was largely similar, too many organizations treated it as “optional,” befitting its name “Guideline”; however, certification organizations worldwide have increasingly, and formally, mandated adherence to this latest version, ARP4754A. For experienced, proficient developers of aircraft or aircraft systems, ARP4754A reads like a book for maintaining good personal health: make a plan for health, understand healthy living, be safe, eat well, reduce stress, exercise, sleep, get regular check-ups to prove you followed your health plan, and repeat. For aircraft, an analogous synopsis of ARP4754A would state: 1. Plan your aircraft/system’s development lifecycle ecosystem; 2. Implement Safety activities per ARP4761 (ARP4761A starting in 2018); 3. Define and justify Assurance Level; 4. Define system architecture and requirements; Validate; 5. Perform Verification and Configuration Management; 6. Implement Process Assurance and prove Transition Criteria. Figuratively and literally, systems development via ARP4754A is the centerpiece: it is preceded by, and must consider, the safety assessment, which is used to help define aircraft/system architecture and aircraft/system safety requirements. In turn, it precedes software and hardware development, yet system considerations are continuously addressed during the entire software and hardware development. A refined view of the relevant guidelines is depicted here: Why ARP4754A? Background. Before delving into ARP4754A specifics, one should truly consider why it exists. When avionics systems were simpler decades ago, it was possible for smart designers to mentally conceive those systems and proceed immediately with implementation. Admittedly, today, the need for ARP4754A is less justifiable for simple systems. At the same time, the number, variety, and complexity of systems continue to grow exponentially. Clearly, avionics systems can be much more complex than commercial brick-and-mortar buildings, but it would be inconceivable to begin building a commercial office building without a soil/earthquake analysis, foundation design, and a plan for inspections. Those inspections obviously continue throughout the building process, including satisfactory electrical and plumbing, emergency exits, and proper reinforcement. While it is possible great builders could possibly build a safe building without detailed plans, blueprints, processes, and inspections, there would be no way to fully verify the building’s “greatness.”Why? “Greatness” must be associated with proof a building is great. The proof is based on assessing implementation versus plans and then correcting any deficiencies found. Clearly, without plans and processes for a building, there is no way to assess or claim that a building’s design and construction are safe. Since developing avionics can be more complex than constructing a building, it is clear that avionics systems require big-picture planning, processes, requirements, safe development, verification/validation, and evidentiary proof of conformance. Welcome to ARP4754A, “Guidelines for Development of Civil Aircraft And Systems.” Background: ARP4754 The original ARP4754 standard was first published in 1996 with the purpose of assisting avionics development organizations to think beyond mere hardware and software. Remember, DO-178 (and its European equivalent ED-12) was published over a decade prior to providing guidelines for avionics software. But by the early 90s, it was clear that safe software and software certification itself required both knowledge of the system and confirmation of system-level safety aspects. ARP4754 was focused on aircraft systems whose failure could potentially affect the safety of aircraft or occupants. While there are certainly critical, stand-alone components on aircraft that could affect safety, ARP4754 is focused not on components but rather on systems that have complex interactions with other systems on or off the aircraft. These systems typically involve multiple knowledge domains and are likely to evolve over time. Thus, they are developed by different persons via different disciplines, often separated by space and time; the best means to ensure safe implementation is via codified development processes based upon deterministic safety: ARP4754. The original ARP4754 standard was also written before the onset of more recent avionics development trends such as model-based development (MBD) and integrated modular avionics (IMA). Its focus was upon a top-down, iterative approach to avionics system development where individual system functionality is identified and then increasingly refined. At its inception, the aircraft and systems safety process was less refined, and ARP4761 was a mere concept. Also, there was a perception that ARP4754 was an society of automotive engineers document and, therefore, not a truly dedicated avionics guideline; admittedly, certification authorities typically may not always have required proof that it was being followed. ARP4754 provided a good reference for system development, but the aforementioned aspects precluded it from being great. Thus, the need for ARP4754A … ARP4754A versus ARP4754 ARP4754 in its original form, before being updated to ARP4754A, had the following characteristics: Old Title: “Certification Considerations for Highly-Integrated or Complex Aircraft Systems” New Title: “Guidelines for Development of Civil Aircraft and Systems As readily seen, the new title in ARP4754A: Emphasizes Development aspects Removes ambiguity of “Highly-Integrated or Complex” terminology Seriously, simply ask, “Which aircraft systems on today’s aircraft are neither complex nor highly integrated”? The answer is “Fewer and fewer …”. It may seem that, as a developer of a system, your system is not complex, as all the engineers working on the project readily understand it. Each system is physically and electrically separated from other systems, so it could be considered “not highly integrated.” However, most avionics systems are, in fact, “integrated” as their safety assessment, design, installation, and operation, in fact, must consider the aircraft and other systems on that aircraft. Thus, ARP4754A’s revised and less subjectively ambiguous title. ARP4754 was “good”: it described a foundational process for developing safe, good-quality avionics systems and aircraft. However, due to the evolution of related guidelines and certification refinement and a requirement to address the increasing integration and complexity of systems, ARP4754 was considered by many to be incomplete; thus, it was not applied as rigorously as needed. The “iterative approach” within ARP4754 was expanded in ARP4754A (in conjunction with ARP4761) to ensure that developers apply a formal iteration process to safety whereby safety is continually addressed with refined safety assessments throughout the project. By contrast, ARP4754A truly emphasizes the importance of an entire ecosystem for avionics system development, founded upon a formal Safety process (supported by ARP4761). ARP4754A provides specific guidance to complying with regulations, and instructions into a “how to” guide for aircraft and system development, emphasizing the need to integrate that Safety and Systems process continuously throughout development. On a recent avionics project, this author performed an audit of the system developer’s documents, commonly referred to as “artifacts” within the aviation certification regime. The client’s Procedures looked more like Plans, and their Audits looked more like Reviews. Clearly, it was time to go back to basics. While it would be easy to write chapters on this topic, it is much more challenging to say it all in one sentence. The writer Mark Twain supposedly said something akin to the following in the opening line of a 10-page letter: “Pardon the length of this letter; I did not have time to make it short.”Meaning: short summaries are more difficult than full novels. We hate long novels in avionics: too much fluff and serious developers lack the time for that. Here is an all-too-brief summary of Plans, Procedures, Reviews, and Audits for avionics systems: “Plans” comply with safety requirements and summarize what you will do while “Processes” state how you will implement the Plans and “Checklists” denote objective review criteria to determine if Processes were followed, then “Process Assurance Audits” assess conformance of engineering/ manufacturing activities, including respective transitions to those Processes and Reviews. Now, who are the intended users of ARP4754A? The primary ARP4754A stakeholders are summarized in the following; airframe manufacturers, system integrators, equipment suppliers, certification authorities. Primary ARP4754A Stakeholders Remember the parable about the different blind persons touching an elephant? Many ARP4754A novices likewise have different perspectives based upon their own vision: an aircraft safety and design guide, a system development guide, or a “how-to” manual to integrate ARP4761A’s safety assessment regimens. But which is it? ARP4754A is all those things but in a generic fitness-manual format based upon provable science. This is summarized in the roots of system engineering, recommends a structured process, and describes a top-down development process. ARP4754A’s Three Key Processes In an oversimplified form, ARP4754A requires a System Planning process to be performed covering eight planning topics described below. After these eight ARP4754A planning topics are addressed within approved plans, the System Development process begins; system development does not include actual hardware or software development within ARP4754A since those are covered under DO-254 and DO-178C, respectively. In the background, the system's Integral Processes are continuously performed. The relationship between these processes is depicted in the figure below; note that the arrow between System Planning and System Development is intentionally drawn one-way, not bi-directional: once Plans are approved, there is no premeditated intention to update those already-approved Plans. (If there are deviations to the Plans later, they are approved and documented externally in the Plans.) ARP4754A’s Planning Process What do aircraft, complex systems, and simple systems alike have in common? They come under the purview of ARP4754A. It is almost impossible for one guideline to be all things to all people; ARP4754A strives to come close. Since aircraft and systems can have huge variations, ARP4754A avoids mandating a prescriptive approach. Instead, guidance is provided for the developer to consider the ramifications of safety and functionality external and internal to their scope of development and proceed accordingly. The analogy is that of a personal fitness coach whose goals vary dramatically depending upon their coaching an injured patient, an average office worker, or an Olympic athlete: different problem domains require a different focus. However, there is only one ARP4754A, so the guidelines must be generic enough to satisfy different domains. Central to any aircraft/system development process is ARP4754A’s required Planning process. ARP4754A provides a comprehensive guideline for performing the myriad engineering activities necessary to develop safe, high-quality avionics systems. As all pilots know, it’s both common and helpful to file flight plans prior to takeoff for significant flying activity. Such flight plans fulfill three primary purposes: forcing the pilot to consider and specify an actual route along with the implications of terrain weather airspace restrictions, etc., alerting authorities to where and when the pilots intend to fly, serving as a means to verify pilot planned locations should anything go astray ARP4754A’s planning process is thus similar to a flight plan as it has three primary purposes: Forcing avionics sytems developers to consider and specify key engineering processes commensuration with requisite safety implications, informing certification authorities to the planned system’s technical and safety attributes along with corresponding planning engineering activities, serve as means to verify planned versus actual avionics engineering activities while holding developers accountable. Once defined, can the system development plans change? Certainly! Just like flight plans can change, the real life of avionics development is rife with small changes. However, changes to the ARP4754A planning process need to carefully consider overall safety aspects, both within that system and also to other systems, meaning both air and ground-based. And they must be documented and approved. The ARP4754A Planning process requires consideration and documentation of the following key development aspects depicted below: Development defines methods/processes for establishing architectural development, integration, and implementation. Safety – define the safety scope applicable to the aircraft system Requirements management – define the acquisition and management of requirements Validation defines methods used to ensure requirements and assumptions are correct Implementation verification – define processes and criteria used to assess if implementation meets requirements Configuration management – define processes/activities to manage development configuration items/versions throughout the life cycle Process assurance – define independent activities used to ensure development activities follow process and plans Certification – define how certification is to be achieved. How the above planning details are placed within documents is less important than the planning details. It is common to make separate plans for each of the above aspects (though Verification and Validation are often combined); separate planning documents increase their reusability on future projects. The question always arises: “How detailed should the plans be?” The answer, of course, depends upon the complexity of the associated engineering activities. Planning to build a skyscraper requires more details than planning to build a small house. Same for aircraft and systems. Plans should be more detailed in areas of the system identified as offering risk, but acknowledge that you may not know these until you’re underway. Appendix A of the ARP outlines the process objective requirements – (independence required, recommended, as negotiated, and not required There should be sufficient detail to deterministically answer the following two questions: 1. Can a certification authority review the plans and make a determination that the defined activities could lead to provably safe development? 2. Can detailed checklists for each planning activity be made by extracting information from the plans for the purpose of independently assessing corresponding development activities? Development Establish the process and methods to be used to provide the framework for the aircraft/system development, integration, and implementation. Safety Program Establish the scope and content of the safety activities related to the development of the aircraft or system. Requirements Capture Identify and describe how the requirements are captured and managed. Sometimes, the requirements capture planning elements are included in conjunction with the requirements validation planning elements. Requirements Validation Describe how the requirements will be shown to be complete and correct and how the assumptions will be managed. Implementation Verification Define the processes and criteria to be applied when showing how the implementation satisfies its requirements. Configuration Management Describe the key development-related configuration items and how they will be managed. Process Assurance Describe the means to ensure the practices and procedures to be applied during the system development is followed. Quick Note on Validation, Verification, Process Assurance, Reviews & Audits Verification is performed by engineering and assess es if implementation meets requirements. Validation assesses the acceptability of those requirements. In the avionics world (and reading between the lines of ARP4754A and the DO-XXX documents) it should be understood that at its simplest, “Verification = Reviews + Tests + Analysis.” Virtually everything is reviewed. Requirements and implementation are tested. The analysis is applied when reviews/tests are not 100 percent conclusive. Both validation and verification are addressed later herein. Audits are process-oriented and performed by independent Quality Assurance (QA), also called Process Assurance (PA) personnel. They are not reviews; instead audits determine if Engineers followed defined processes. For Systems, quality assurance is termed Process Assurance (PA) which is a superset of quality assurance, but the terms are used in aviation almost interchangeably. A major problem happens when Reviews are incomplete because an engineer thinks an auditor will review later; they won't. Auditors do not do reviews, period. They do audits. Reviews are technical; audits are to process. Both are needed: each is important, but they are different. Like a wine bottle and the wine itself: cannot enjoy one without the other - which is more important? Both ... Another problem occurs when Auditors think they are Reviewers. They are not; if an Auditor (Process Assurance) has to review, then the question is, “Why didn't Engineering do an appropriate review, as documented by the corresponding Checklist?” Safety First You have planned your avionics system development according to the above, and the plans are complete. Where do you start? Easy: with the Safety process. Safety truly is the foundation and primary focus of ARP4754A: the reason for all the plans, processes, and checklists is to enable Safety to be kept at the forefront of development and assessed throughout. At the aircraft level, ARP4754A requires an overall Safety Program Plan (SPP). It is common to have system-level SPP’s for each system. Regardless, each + is considered within the aircraft level SPP. Like building a house, the scope of avionics safety takes many different forms: foundation, architecture, problem detection, problem mitigation, susceptibility to particular hazards (lightning, etc.), and verifiability. So multiple safety activities and analysis are required. Functional Hazard Assessment The objective of the Functional Hazard Assessment is to identify functions, failure conditions of functions (loss of function, malfunction, etc.), and their classification (catastrophic, hazardous, etc.) so that aircraft and system designs may be proposed and achieved which decrease the probability of the occurrence of the failure conditions to acceptably lesser levels. It should be noted that in some cases, the total loss of a function is not as impactful as the partial or misleading loss of functionality; a pilot may be more likely to mitigate the total loss of one system’s functionality by switching to a different system. Preliminary System Safety Assessment (PSSA) The Preliminary System Safety Assessment is a set of analyses normally performed during the system requirements and item requirements phases of the aircraft life cycle. The Preliminary System Safety Assessment is where the proposed aircraft and system architectures are evaluated and defined; this provides the ability to derive system and item safety requirements. The input documents to the Preliminary System Safety Assessment are the aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment, preliminary aircraft Fault Tree Analysis fault tree analysis (and allocation of failure budget against the top-level failure requirement), and the system Functional Hazard Assessments. The documents produced during the Preliminary System Safety Assessment are the updated aircraft and system Functional Hazard Assessments, updated aircraft and systems Fault Tree analyses, and the preliminary system Common Cause Analyses (CCAs). The Preliminary System Safety Assessment is a continuous and iterative process. The objective of the Preliminary System Safety Assessment is to determine how the aircraft and system failures can lead to the hazards identified in the Functional Hazard Assessments and to determine how the Functional Hazard Assessment requirements can be met. The Preliminary System Safety Assessment is often associated with the Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment (PASA). An important note: Appendix 1 of AC23.1309-E has some useful guidance to assist with assessing the severity of failure conditions of aircraft functions and systems at this stage of the project. System Safety Assessment (SSA) The ARP4754A / ARP4761A System Safety Assessment verifies that the implemented aircraft and system designs meet the requirements of the aircraft/system Functional Hazard Assessment, the Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment (PASA), and the Preliminary System Safety Assessment (PSSA). The System Safety Assessment documentation generated during the System Safety Assessment includes: Updated aircraft Fault Tree analysis, system Functional Hazard Assessments, and system Fault Tree analysis Documentation showing item installation requirements Any material used to validate the failure condition classifications If necessary, revised maintenance manuals detailing new maintenance tasks aimed at reducing component exposure times If necessary, revised flight crew operating manuals detailing procedures to be followed in the event of certain failure conditions The System Safety Assessment should verify that all significant effects identified in the failure modes and effects summary are considered for inclusion as primary events in the Fault Tree Analysis, and the System Safety Assessment should also include applicable Common Cause Analysis results. Common Cause Analysis (CCA) The acceptance of adequate probability of failure conditions is often derived from the assessment of multiple systems based on the assumption that failures are independent. This independence might not exist in the practical sense, and specific studies are necessary to ensure that independence can either be assured or deemed acceptable. The Common Cause Analysis is concerned with events that could lead to a hazardous or catastrophic failure condition. Many consider the same software installed on multiple LRUs to be the most often overlooked area of common cause. For example, Dual Flight Management Systems (FMS) could fail under the exact same conditions if the same software is installed on both units. For a complete description of Functional Hazard Assessment, Preliminary System Safety Assessment, System Safety Assessment, and Common Cause Analysis, see the corresponding ARP4761 Safety Assessment chapter herein. Development Assurance Level Assignment In conjunction with the Safety activities above, the Development Assurance Level (DAL) assignment is determined. Informally referred to as “criticality level”, the Development Assurance Level is a designator which defines the development process rigor associated with the corresponding probability that errors could occur. The more critical the item to flight safety, the less the probability that errors can occur for that item. There are two types of Development Assurance Levels defined by ARP4754A: 1. Functional Development Assurance Level, called FDAL; and 2. Item Development Assurance Level, called IDAL. Functional Development Assurance Level and Item Development Assurance Level are summarized in – Function Development Assurance Level – The level of rigor of development assurance tasks performed to functions Item Development Assurance Level – The level of rigor in the development assurance tasks performed on items. Remember: the safety process is iterative. However, initiation of Functional Development Assurance Level assignment should precede Item Development Assurance Level assignment; if you don’t know the Functional Development Assurance Level, you cannot fully assign the ensuing Item Development Assurance Level item Objectives per Functional Development Assurance Level: While not mandatory, it’s most common to determine the Functional Development Assurance Level first, then followed by Item Development Assurance Level determination. Why? Functions are associated with requirements, and those requirements are allocated to items. Functions and their requirements thus describe “what” a system does while the actual requirement is implemented in hardware and/or software items. ; This is to allow a single function to be split between multiple items to potentially allow a lower Design Assurance Level of those individual items. The level of rigor for the functional requirement development is defined by the Functional Development Assurance Level, with level A being the most rigorous. The required development objectives for each Functional Development Assurance Level are provided in Appendix A of ARP4754A itself. The corresponding hardware/software item development likewise has a specific Development Assurance Level assignment called an Item Development Assurance Level; the required hardware/software development objectives for each Item Development Assurance Level are provided in DO-178C (ED-12C for Europe) and DO-254 (ED-80 for Europe). The development assurance level determination starts by considering the functions of the aircraft or system’s functional hazard assessment failure conditions; these are called “Top-level failure conditions.” The Functional Development Assurance Level is assigned based on the most severe Top-Level Failure Condition. For example, if the most severe is Development Assurance Level B, the Functional Development Assurance Level is thus Level B. A synopsis of the Functional Development Assurance Level’s is provided below: Catastrophic A, Hazardous/Severe-Major B, Major C, Minor D, No Safety Effect E. ARP4754A describes specific processes for considering independence between systems and processes as they pertain to Development Assurance Level. The goal is to ensure requisite levels of necessary safety and elimination of common mode failures. For example, if a single failure can affect multiple systems or components, then independence can be added to prevent that single failure from affecting more than one system or component. Functional independence ensures that functions are not affected by common errors within the same function. For example, navigation is clearly an important function for aircraft safety; using two sources of navigation data (Global Positioning System (GPS) and Inertial Navigation System (INS)) provides for functional independence and elimination of many common mode error problems that could occur otherwise: Item Development Independence likewise ensures that the items associated with the function do not experience common errors; for example, using different operating systems within independent items provides for Item Development Independence, which could occur if a single operating system had an unmitigated error: Defining Requirements You have defined the Development Assurance Level, and it is time to define the requirements. What? Requirements are not considered during the Development Assurance Level assignment process. While it’s common to know, or at least initiate, the requirements in parallel with the Development Assurance Level assignment process, the Development Assurance Level is about safety and thus should be initiated without formally considering the requirements. Safety considerations need to precede functionality. Requirements are defined partly to satisfy safety, as determined via the Development Assurance Level process. So, the determination of the Development Assurance Level precedes the definition of the requirement. How are requirements defined? By considering the various types of requirements and how each pertains to the aircraft or system being developed. The following figure depicts the primary types of requirements that must be defined, along with the common (but not mandated) order: Safety Requirements. Functional Requirements. Operational Requirements, Interface requirements, Performance requirements, Derived requirements. Which of the above requirement types are important? They all are. But really, which are most important? Functional and operational performance is important: the aircraft and systems need to fulfill objectives, and those objectives must be clearly defined; requirements provide that definition. Operational aspects and the interfaces affect the ability to perform and are necessary to define. However, safety is paramount, so the safety requirements must be paramount. However, safety requirements are usually the most difficult to define as there is more subjectivity involved: how safe is“safe”? Careful consideration must be given to the safety assessment artifacts to consider relevant failure conditions, modes, and effects; knowledge should focus on prevention, but wisdom should prevail, knowing one hundred percent prevention is impossible. So architectural aspects, including redundancy, dissimilarity, partitioning, etc., must be added to support the requisite Development Assurance Level, and those aspects must be defined via requirements. The approach to be used for requirements capture must be defined in advance in the planning process. Why? Plans are independently assessed prior to following the activities described in those plans so the planned requirements capture process can be evaluated prior to initiation. Some say the biggest mistake made during this phase is for the requirements writers to incorrectly muse, “but the pilot would never do that … “ Particularly as flight decks become more and more automated, the Catch-22 of automation pervades: the more automation, the more the pilot depends upon automation, so the more automation. Requirement Sources and Traceability The aviation development ecosystem places “requirements” as the foundation for success. When Fred Brooks wrote “The Mythical Man Month” in 1975, none of these aircraft, systems, safety, hardware, or software guidelines were in existence; they continuing airworthines management exposition just a few years later. However, Brooks’ monumental book on complex computing systems reached important conclusions that were later “baked” into the emerging aviation guidelines. Brooks noted that the number one source of errors for such computing systems was “assumptions,” including assumptions made by engineers in the absence of defined requirements. Remember: “Verification” is the assessment of implementation conformance to requirements, whereas “Validation” is the assessment of the requirements themselves. Validation is more important because if you don’t correct, complete, and unambiguous requirements, it doesn’t matter later if you, in fact, “verified” them. (This is all covered in more detail below and in subsequent chapters). So ARP4754A mandates a requirements management process, and such is flowed down through the hardware and software processes. Regarding safety and requirements, an often misunderstood aspect is the role of derived requirements. What are the derived requirements? Be careful of linguistics. If English is not your native tongue, despair not: native English speakers are seemingly less able to understand the meaning of “derived requirements” because they are derived from an engineer’s desire to address an otherwise undocumented or overlooked capability. Derived requirements usually do not trace to a parent requirement or describe obvious functionality. Instead, derived requirements are additional aspects that the system or aircraft being developed must implement, typically to address safety, re-use, or verifiability. For example, sampling rates, the use of partitioning, or adding redundancy with health monitoring and voting are all examples of functionality commonly addressed via derived requirements. Since derived requirements often relate directly to safety or to a gap-closing definition of functionality, ARP4754A requires developers to ensure the existence of a feedback loop to the safety process for all derived requirements. Any change to derived requirements must be fed back to the safety process to determine any direct or indirect impact upon safety, and the developers are required to prove the mandatory use of this process for all derived requirements, as audited by Quality Assurance. Requirement Validation Congratulations – the aircraft and system requirements are captured, and it’s time to initiate design and then implementation. But you’re smart, and you know you will verify those requirements later to ensure implementation satisfies them. Wait: how do you know you have the “right” requirements? Exactly. That is the role of requirements validation, and it must precede design/implementation. Why? Requirements are the foundation of aircraft and systems. Like building a house, changing the foundation after starting construction is undesirable for many reasons, the most important of which is safety. Truly, you need to determine if you have conflicting, incomplete, or incorrect requirements long before you initiate development. ARP4754A requires a formal validation process whereby requirements are evaluated for correctness and completeness before they are used in design/implementation. However, requirements validation is performed throughout the development process because changes are inevitable, and all changes to requirements or anything affecting a requirement must be assessed through validation. The approach to requirements validation must be defined in advance via plans; typically, a separate validation plan is utilized. However, it is common to combine validation planning documentation within the verification plan since validation and verification are related. Remember: Aircraft, System, and Hardware requirements can and must be Validated. However, since “Validation” includes “completeness and correctness,” software requirements (discussed later in this book) are NOT validated since software requires both hardware and a system context to be assessed for Completeness. Requirements validation is a formal process, and within aviation, most formal processes require checklists. Even a 5,000-hour pilot with vast experience is formally required to follow a checklist for many key activities, including takeoff and landing. And because safety is so important, commercial aircraft utilize a co-pilot for added independent verification. Fortunately, ARP4754A provides high-level requirement validation criteria in section 5.4.3, which should be used to form the basis of the validation checklist. For brevity, these are not repeated herein as there is little unique about requirements validation in aviation versus other safety-critical industries (however, the term“validation” itself is used differently – see the corresponding Aviation Requirements chapter in this book). The usual evaluation criteria apply: correctness, non-ambiguity, avoidance of conflicting logic, identifiability, traceability, impact upon safety, etc. Aircraft and System requirements validation: identify the requirements interface and formalize the interface through agreements. The agreement should define interface behaviors to be provided when an input is received; the independent reviewer should challenge the assumptions and interpretations of captured requirements with the originator; noncomplex items may be considered as meeting Development Assurance Level A rigor when they are fully assured by a combination of testing analysis. Implementation Verification The plans have been followed perfectly, requirements seem to be perfectly validated, and Quality Assurance has audited the activities throughout the engineering process, including all transitions through implementation. Ready to begin the flight test? Not so fast. Remember, in aviation, the probability of software error is assumed to be “1”, e.g. errors happen – can they be detected and mitigated? During engineering, the same philosophy applies. While great plans, processes, and engineering produce measurably better systems with fewer errors, verification is still required. The common belief is that verification improves quality by finding errors. While not incorrect, verification is really performed to assess the adequacy of prior activities in conjunction with a feedback loop to improve those activities and their implementation. Therefore, aviation verification is more important and more encompassing than mere bug detection. It is commonly believed that verification is performed purely to identify errors so that they can be fixed. While partially true, verification at the aircraft and avionics systems level per ARP4754A is more encompassing, as it is also used to assess the completeness and quality of preceding development activities, including Safety, Requirements, and Design, not just Implementation. Remember the overly simplistic verification equation cited earlier, “Verification = Reviews + Tests + Analysis Both the required and the potential verification activities are more diverse; keep in mind the degree of verification rigor increases with the Development Assurance Level rigor, e.g., Development Assurance Level A is the most intensive. The following figure depicts the common types of verification applied under ARP4754A: Inspection or review, visual examination of artifacts to determine satisfaction of requirements Model assessment – examination of the models or model elements to assess real-time behavior Analysis – detailed examination of engineering data generally against expected acceptance criteria Testing or demonstration – execution of system to assess actual versus expected results Similarity service history – using prior successful verification credit systems that are identical or nearly so. Aircraft/System Supporting Processes per ARP4754A: Configuration Management & Process Assurance Your engineers are smarter than Einstein and more organized than a contingent of efficiency experts; you have built the world’s first perfect aircraft system on the first attempt. Kudos. Surely, certification will be a breeze, correct? Hardly. Perhaps your engineers were utterly brilliant, but what about the weaker link who is hired later to make changes to the system; that is why professional configuration management (CM) is needed. How can you prove that your flock of Einsteins actually followed the defined process? Independent process assurance (PA) must audit the engineer’s work and artifacts to assess conformance to defined processes. Configuration Management and Process Assurance are supporting processes whose output does not directly contribute to the aircraft/system but is completely necessary. Configuration Management (CM). Configuration Management must be defined within a plan and then carried out according to that plan throughout the life of the aircraft/system, not just through initial certification. Essentially, Configuration Management ensures the ability to know and control the provenance of all elements comprising every deployed aircraft/system and corresponding artifacts. Proper Configuration Management is in place when everyone could leave a project, and subsequent personnel would be able to perfectly recreate any delivered aircraft or system version and know the full history of all contributors, dates, versions, and relationship to other versions, with assurance that no unauthorized changes have been made to any such version. Therefore, Configuration Management processes must be in place to establish baselines, manage change control, ensure archival and retrieval, and maintain a perfect configuration index that lists every artifact used in the engineering of the system/aircraft. Always remember: the more complex the project or the more volatile the requirements, the greater the probability of introducing configuration management, which is nearly impossible to recover from without excessive undue effort. Process Assurance (PA). Process Assurance was lightly touched upon earlier above when audits versus reviews were addressed. Remember: engineers perform technical reviews; process assurance performs audits that are process-oriented. Again, within Process Assurance, the commercial and conventional military world is different from ARP4754A and DO-XXX. Process Assurance has different roles within the avionics development ecosystem: Process Assurance approves the plans, standards, and checklists and then assesses compliance with such; they don't do reviews - they do audits, including assessment of transition criteria. Avionics development plans specify major activities in terms of inputs and outputs for each of those activities. Engineering must adhere to those inputs and outputs and assess them via reviews. Reviews are done by engineering, using engineering checklists. Process Assurance assesses those inputs and outputs and checks them as ‘transitions,’ thus determining if the transition criteria were met. Audits are done by Process Assurance, using Process Assurance checklists. Configuration Management and Process Assurance processes must be defined in a plan. Configuration Management need not be independent, meaning engineers can perform their own Configuration Management, though large organizations tend to have Configuration Management teams or individuals solely responsible for such. Process Assurance, however, must be provably independent of engineering, and Process Assurance members should not report to the system/aircraft engineering manager but rather through a separate and independent quality assurance organization in order to provide demonstrable independence. The overall system processes of ARP4754A have now been described. Additional guidelines discussed in subsequent chapters herein exist for airborne software and hardware, databases, ground-based systems, and virtually every other subset of aircraft and systems related to engineering quality or safety. Each of those entities has specific guidelines dedicated to their corresponding area but which largely mimic the foundational processes specified within ARP4754A: safety, planning, requirements, implementation, V&V, Configuration Management, and Quality Assurance. Build a good aircraft and system foundation, and the remainder of the building can be solid. But remember: anyone can overpay for custom solutions and, with excess time/schedule, achieve a satisfactory result. The wise achieve better results more quickly and more cost-effectively by knowing their goals early and planning accordingly.