Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 11 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification DO-278A CNS/ATM Ground & Satellite Systems/Software DO-278A is often referred to as “DO-178’s little brother, for ground systems.” However, is DO-278A a little brother or more of a big sister? And is it just for ground systems? The answers may surprise … DO-278A is properly titled “Guidelines for Communication, Navigation, Surveillance, and Air Traffic Management (Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management) Systems Software Integrity Assurance”. The operative term here is “Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management, which again means ground-based aviation software involved with “Communications, Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic Management.” While most of these systems are on the ground, some are airborne such as space-based surveillance systems and early warning and reconnaissance aircraft. For example, the latest Iridium TM communications satellite systems (which this author and 60 of his engineers worked on in the latter 1990’s) has a new generation of satellites with built-in Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADSB) equipment onboard used to track aircraft; this satellite-based ADSB equipment is certified to DO-278A. (This author assisted with that effort also, though two decades later). With such a long title, it’s a sure bet that DO-278A is NOT merely a little brother to DO-178C. In fact, DO-278 was updated to DO-278A via the Special Committee #205 and released in December of 2011. As any true student of history knows, it is not the absolute date of events which is important, but rather the context of what was occurring simultaneously elsewhere in the world which matters. In the case of SC-205, it is imperative to understand that DO-178B was being updated simultaneously which yielded DO-178C for avionics software released nearly simultaneously. The vast majority, over 95%, of DO-278A is identical to DO-178C, for good reasons: both Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management (DO-278A) and avionics (DO-178C) have potential aviation safety effects per varying criticality levels yet employ quite similar software engineering methodologies. Simply put, there was no reason to reinvent the wheel. Since you are reading this book which is about the “Ecosystem” of aviation system development, there is no reason to repeat the DO-178C information which is found in two dedicated chapters herein but also embodied with the DO-178C applicable chapters on Tool Qualification, Model-Based Development, Object Oriented Technology, Software Quality Assurance, Software Transitions, Mistakes, and Costs. Instead, this Chapter here will highlight DO-278A fundamentals and the key differences with DO-178C. As with airborne software (software which either executes onboard an aircraft, or directly influences the execution of such software), Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management can obviously affect aviation safety. In fact, many facets of Communication, Navigation, Surveillance, and Air Traffic Management impact safety because a single error could have dire repercussions. As a result, it is imperative that Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management be subjected to a process which has the following provable attributes: Assess potential impact upon safety Determines potential impact upon safety and assess criticality Mandates engineering development process based upon safety impact Maximizes similarities with other aviation safety-related standards Consider unique aspects of ground-based systems Commercial Off-The-Shelf, hardware and software Is regulated by international and local authorities Voilà: DO-278A is here. What exactly is DO-278A then? DO-278A is the second version of the baseline DO-278 document. It’s a corollary to DO-178C, which as noted above is a similar standard for airborne software safety, e.g. software that typically executes onboard aircraft and which contributes to flight safety. If you already understand DO-178C, then you have the benefit of implicitly knowing 95% of DO-278A because they are similar; numerous aspects are identical. Also, understanding that DO-278A and DO-178C are similar means you can readily tap into the much larger literature base of DO-178C, as there is relatively little published literature on DO-278A due to the relatively small number of Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management equipment manufacturers. However, there is a disadvantage in being familiar with DO-178C and wanting to understand DO-278A: human nature “glosses over” subtle differences between them which results in significant misunderstandings and mistakes when applying DO-278A. The information herein will both describe DO-278A for beginners and also illuminate differences with DO-178C. DO-278A is a strong guideline comprising both recommendations and assessable objectives. It is intended for use in developing real-time ground or satellite-based systems containing software which are involved with aircraft operations. These based systems almost always make heavy use of Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) technologies including hardware and software. The ground-based systems governed by DO-278A often have much larger, and more diverse, software components than their airborne avionic counterparts. Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems have simultaneously evolved from prior systems which preceded the requirement to follow DO-278 and still employ large bases of such legacy software code. Thus, the size, diversity, and increased reliance upon Commercial Off-The-Shelf technology all play a key role in the need for DO-278A; these Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management characteristics comprise the heart of the differences between DO-278A and DO-178C. DO-278A and DO-178C: The Similarities. Like DO-178C, DO-278A relies upon a safety assessment process to determine the system/software criticality. Where the airborne world terms this Development Assurance Level (DAL) is shortened to Assurance Level (AL) for Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management. DO-278A has the three key processes of Planning, Development, and Integral Correctness. DO-278A’s Three Key Processes DO-278A’s Key Topics versus Three Key Processes As previously noted, DO-278A is 95% similar to DO-178C, particularly in the following areas: Safety assessment with continuous involvement of Safety 5 Plans, 3 Standards, and associated Checklists High and Low-level requirements Design and architecture Bi-directional Traceability Requirements & structural coverage assessment-based testing Independence of reviews at the higher criticality levels Strong configuration management including problem reporting Technical reviews and Quality Assurance audits of the above Strong Quality Assurance to assess transition criteria Tool Qualification Certification liaison However, there are several key differences with DO-178C. First consider the breadth of DO-278A’s application domain. From its title, the primary focus upon real-time systems involved with communications, navigation, surveillance, and air traffic management is apparent. But is that all? No, and that’s why DO-278A is informally referred to as the aviation standard for ground-based systems. What additional application domains might be subjected to DO-278A guidance? UAS ground controllers/stations (e.g. pilot stations) GPS equipment on the ground when in the airplane control realm Ground-based transceivers, including ADS-B functionality Satellite systems supporting aircraft communication, surveillance, and navigation. Just because an aviation-related system is ground or space-based, does that mean it must adhere to DO-278A? Not necessarily. Many ground-based systems are “involved” with aircraft or aviation but need not adhere to DO-278A. Examples of such systems include flight simulators, aircraft inventory management, flight planning, mission planning, runway lighting, and tools which assess Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems. The key to being considered for DO-278A application is to ask the following two questions: 1. “Does the ground-based system directly affect safety of flying aircraft without directly controlling that aircraft?” 2. “Are there outputs of the system which have not been verified by other means?” If the answer to both of the above questions is “Yes,” then the system probably falls under the DO-278A realm. Note the first question’s caveat: “Without directly controlling that aircraft.” What’s the intention there? Consider a ground-based, Unmanned Aerial System which controls a UAV. That system has elements which directly control that aircraft by sending real-time commands; in that sense it behaves like a pilot, only the “pilot” is on the ground. But the commands to the aircraft are just as important as if the pilot were on board the aircraft—in that case those elements may fall under DO-178C. Hence it is important to discuss the scope of the system with certification authorities early in the project’s planning stage. Consider the following statements concerning ground-based aeronautical systems and DO-278A and assess whether they are true or false; answers and explanations are provided within this chapter: 1. T / F: All ground-based aviation systems must apply DO-278A 2. T / F: DO-278A is approximately 50% similar to DO-178, but many important differences exist. 3. T / F: assurance level 4 requires low-level requirements and assurance level 5 requires defined architecture 4. T / F: assurance level 3 requires low-level requirements and assurance level-4 requires a defined architecture 5. T / F: Only assurance level 1 and assurance level-2 have independence requirements Again, if you know all the answers to the above, congratulate yourself on your above-average DO-278A knowledge as you reinforce that knowledge by affirming the answers which follow. DO-278A’s Five Plans. As depicted in the earlier presented material on DO-278C’s three key processes, the Planning process comes first, and when complete it is followed by a larger Development process. In the background the largest set of Integral Correctness processes are performed continuously: Verification, Configuration Management, Quality Assurance, and Approval Liaison. Like DO-178C, a key aspect of Quality Assurance is to ensure the plans are complete and comply with DO-278A, then assessing Engineering’s conformance to those plans. Also, Quality Assurance assesses the transition criteria between the activities requisite to ensure the timeliness and inputs/outputs of each activity are in accordance with plans. The five DO-278A plans are: preliminary system safety assessment – Plans for Software aspects of approval SQAP – Software quality assurance plan SCMP – Software configuration management plan SWDP – Software development plan SWVP – software verification plan Differences between DO-278A and DO-178C. The first major difference with DO-278A is its emphasis upon, and allowance for, Commercial Off-The-Shelf systems. Whereas DO-178C places the same burden upon Commercial Off-The-Shelf software as for custom-development software, DO-278A recognizes that ground-based systems make extensive use of Commercial Off-The-Shelf technology and therefore must make accommodations for such. What would happen if DO-278A did not readily accommodate Commercial Off-The-Shelf software? Operating systems, graphics, database, and communications protocols are heavily used in DO-278A, extensively more than in onboard avionics via DO-178C. Furthermore, ground-based systems are much more feature-rich than airborne applications, so the software content is much greater, often 10X times larger. Since Commercial Off-The-Shelf technologies are generally industry neutral, they are developed without any consideration for DO-278A; thus reverse-engineering them for DO-278A compliance would result in little value but huge cost. Instead, DO-278A is pragmatic given the preceding, Commercial Off-The-Shelf technologies are allowed. However, Commercial Off-The-Shelf technologies within DO-278A require: Acquisition strategies, defined a priori Identification and analysis of verifiability Verification of integration and functionality Tight configuration management and control Compliance with associated DO-278A (according to Assurance Level for which Commercial Off-The-Shelf is used within) or justification of Alternate Means of Compliance. Note that DO-178C’s certification plan was called a “Plan for Software Aspects of Certification” (PSAC). Such PSAC’s are project specific, and if that project is for a specific aircraft, then that DO-178C software is both project and aircraft specific: only when it is certified for that specific project and/or aircraft is the corresponding system deemed “certified”. However, Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems are different: Software updates and new software functionality are more continuously made to Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems than to aircraft. Also, Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems are comprised mostly of Commercial Off-The-Shelf hardware. Therefore, Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems are “approved” rather than certified and unlike aircraft hardware certification via DO-254, Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management hardware is subjected to system-level testing, not hardware-specific. Regarding DO-278A’s Preliminary System Safety Assessment, this author has seen the most common Preliminary System Safety Assessment mistakes denoted below: Failing to justify Assurance Level and reference safety assessments Failure to describe proposed system and software architecture Failure to describe tools to be used and qualification need/strategy for tools Failure to comply with DO-278A, ED-153, Safety Failure to get certifying agency approval after submitting Preliminary System Safety Assessment Why does DO-278A devote so much attention to Commercial Off-The-Shelf-related processes? Since Commercial Off-The-Shelf technologies are so common (and virtually mandatory) within Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management, certification authorities want to ensure a verifiable quality process is associated. The Commercial Off-The-Shelf quality process begins with considering which system requirements will be satisfied as a whole or in part by Commercial Off-The-Shelf technologies. First it is necessary to actually define the ground-based system with enough granularity to perform a make-versus-buy trade-off analysis on all requirements. Those requirements allocated to “buy” become Commercial Off-The-Shelf designated requirements. From there, DO-278A requires consideration of the Commercial Off-The-Shelf lifecycle data: how will sufficient detail be provided to assess? Next, derived requirements for the Commercial Off-The-Shelf functionality are specified to ensure awareness of additional, or refined, capabilities which must be satisfied; those too are allocated to Commercial Off-The-Shelf. Then the compatibility of the Commercial Off-The-Shelf technology with the target hardware/software must be considered. You must have sufficient information regarding the Commercial Off-The-Shelf technologies in order to address the above and proceed. Another area of emphasis within DO-278A pertains to Commercial Off-The-Shelf and Safety. Since Commercial Off-The-Shelf is more prevalent, there needs to be an accompanying consideration of Safety vis-à-vis Commercial Off-The-Shelf. The manner in which faults are identified, detected, and mitigated must be addressed. Fault containment boundaries, both technical and procedural, need to be addressed. Via the safety process, error sources must be identified then efforts made to prove they were eliminated. Remember: “guilty-until-proven” innocent in aviation certification means you must keep records which prove you performed the following: Developed and documented a formal process to perform safety analysis Developed safety requirements including derived safety requirements Utilized an ongoing background safety process, which considers safety effects for all changes and test results analysis Identified error sources and proved you eliminated them Established fault containment boundaries generally using software or system partitioning A common area of misunderstanding in DO-278A is the belief that since ground-based systems are large, complex, use Commercial Off-The-Shelf software, and must be cost-effective, then the costly low-level design/code processes can be skipped. Untrue. DO-278A at the higher assurance levels requires low-level requirements, designs, code reviews, and software structural coverage. Why? Such has been proven necessary to help assess, and thus improve, reliability and safety. Design Assurance (Criticality) Levels: DO-278A has specific objectives based upon the assurance level (AL) of the software. Higher assurance levels must satisfy more DO-278A objectives than lower levels. After the software criticality level has been determined, you examine DO-278A to determine exactly which objectives must be satisfied for the software. Now you are ready for planning. This is where DO-278A is similar to building a house: you’ve performed geographic analysis to determine what type of foundation is required—that is your “safety assessment”. Then you need a Planning Process, followed by a Development Process. A concurrent Correctness Process is ongoing throughout both Planning and Development. Avionics software engineering under DO-278A is thus the same as building a house and follows the same three-phased process approach. First, you need to understand the Assurance Level (assurance level) of the system and software you are developing for DO-278A. The rigor applied to planning, development, and correctness of your software is directly associated with its assurance level—often referred to as “criticality level.” There are six levels, with increasing rigor from Level 6 to the most stringent Level 1, note that “Independence” refers to the Engineering verification process, not the Quality Assurance process which is always independent: What is meant by “Independence” above? This is “engineering “independence, not Quality Assurance independence (which is always required). Engineering independence simply means an artifact verification activity is performed by people and processes different from those of the artifact’s author. Simple. Just remember that “Verification” equals “Reviews”, “Tests”, and “Analysis”. Now, contrast the above with DO-178C, which is generally more well-known than DO-278A. Five of the six DO-278A assurance levels bear a close resemblance to the five assurance levels within DO-278A. The difference is assurance level 4. As can be seen DO-278A has a special level, assurance level 4, which is between DO-178’s Level C and D. So, is it viewed as a level C- or a D+? The answer is both. Remember the difference between DO-178B’s Level C and D? Level D had 28 objectives whereas Level C was much more rigorous with 57 objectives. That meant Level D was not concerned with how the software was designed or implemented but rather that it fulfilled an intended function while following system-level engineering processes. So DO-278A’s assurance level 4 fits squarely in the middle: assurance level 4 retains a modest verification of how the software was developed. assurance level 4 requires data/control coupling analysis (which is design-based) but does NOT require any software structural coverage analysis or robustness testing to code as required for assurance level 3. But why does DO-278 have this special in-between assurance level 4? Think about it …most Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems support safe flight but are not as directly involved with that safety as the aircraft’s onboard systems. For example, if a Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management system defect should inadvertently generate instructions for a pilot to fly “through” a mountain, the aircraft’s onboard systems and pilots have a high probability of detecting such erroneous instructions and disobeying them to avoid impact. Therefore, most Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management software falls into the assurance level3 – assurance level5 category; very little is at assurance level1 – assurance level2. And it is this author’s experience that 40-50% of Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management software is at assurance level4, where ample use of Commercial Off-The-Shelf software can be readily made because assurance level4 requires verification at the Application Program Interface (API) level but not the internal code and data structures level. Therefore, assurance level4 software is vastly easier to certify than assurance level3. DO-278A’s Ecosystem of Requirements As noted in a preceding chapter for avionics software and hardware, the foundation of Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management is also based upon requirements. Whereas ARP4754A/4761A were explicitly developed for aircraft and onboard systems, their application to Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management is more adjunct. In Europe, Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management makers and european union aviation safety agency still have a small preference for applying ED-153, Guidelines for ANS Software Safety Assurance. However as of the date of this writing, ARP4754A and ARP4761 were gradually becoming more recognized for application to Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management in Europe, with non-European countries already largely moved away from ED-153. One of the challenges with ED-153 is that its myriad guidelines were deemed rather prescriptive, hence subjective and more difficult to assess. However, it is also this author’s opinion that anyone performing Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management safety activities read ED-153, even if not formally required, to obtain helpful information on Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management safety assessment practices. Legacy Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management Systems, Service History, and DO-278A. Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management Systems typically have significant non-certified legacy software/hardware which predates more recent mandates to apply DO-278A. Instead of starting over and redeveloping these systems from scratch which could incur a heightened probability of introducing new errors, , the concept of “Service History” can be applied. Note that the “history” term is paramount: there must be provable evidence of strong record-keeping applied to that prior software/system. The Certification Authorities Software Team (CAST) Memorandum #1 covered the attributes applicable to applying service history; these are depicted below, cut/paste from CAST-1. While CAST-1 (and many other CAST papers) were removed from the federal aviation administration and european union aviation safety agency websites which previously contained them, CAST-1 is still applied informally to Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems. Note that few systems ever rank completely “Acceptable” within each of the CAST-1 Table 3.3-1 attributes, so the Plan for Software Aspects of Approval (DO-278A’s certification plan) must provide details on each attribute. Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management systems place greater reliance upon Commercial Off-The-Shelf and legacy software than their airborne counterparts do. Airborne software is normally certified to DO-178C which adherents use to assess compliance for all executing software including operating systems, graphics libraries, Board Support Packages (BSP’s), etc. However, Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management system developers and certification bodies have a somewhat different philosophy: it is better to reuse proven technology, even if not developed per DO-278A, than to reinvent all new software which can then be certified to DO-278A. The rationale for this is simple: ground-based systems make vastly greater use of Commercial Off-The-Shelf software/hardware products; they also have vast operational codebases which preceded DO-278. As a result, DO-278A provides explicit provisions for potentially utilizing “alternate methods”; these methods then become Alternate Means of Compliance (AMC) to achieve certifiability. DO-278A’s glossary identifies a gap analysis process to determine the gap between a proposed compliance approach and that prescribed by DO-278A. Then AMC’s are identified and analyzed for acceptability; these are then detailed within the Communication, Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic Management system Plan For Software Aspects of Approval (Preliminary System Safety Assessment) for subsequent certification authority review and approval. There is no formal or agreed upon acceptable means of compliance’s to be applied to DO-278A. However, it is this author’s experience and opinion that acceptable AMC’s are comprised from the following “toolbox” which includes the following six categories of acceptable means of compliance’s: Service experience – one option Added software design – six options Added software process – six options Added review/analysis – four options Added testing – three options Added QA - one option Service experience is almost universally believed to be the first, and most essential, means for alternate means of DO-278A compliance. However, service experience has a high burden of proof and should be based upon numerous relevant criteria including service length, change control, defect density, history of usage and changes, and degree of hardware/software modifications made during that history or proposed for the new platform. These service experience criteria often exclude the viability of service experience applications.