Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 6 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification DO-178C Avionics Software Prelude By Vance Hilderman By 2005, DO-178B, the avionics software guideline titled “Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification,” was becoming middle-aged, and it was simply time for a refresh. What could be easier? Admittedly, the world of software development, even within the usually staid avionics community, had made many strides that DO-178B, published fifteen years prior, could not possibly have foreseen. In technology, as in life, the only constant is change. Especially software technology, where change is measured in months, not decades. As described in the preceding chapters, DO-178 (or its identical counterpart “ED-12” in Europe, where “ED” simply stands for “European Document”) for avionics software is part of the overall aviation development and certification ecosystem. In fact, avionics software development theoretically and normally follows the other key processes of 1) aircraft/systems safety, 2) aircraft and systems development, and 3) hardware development. However, the real world is often different from the theoretical, and such is the case here: the first version of DO-178 was published in 1980, which was LONG before the other guidelines for Safety, Aircraft/Systems, and Hardware. Therefore, instead of being a simple cog in the wheel of aviation, DO-178 is, in fact, the historical and foundational cornerstone for the other guidelines and standards. It should come as no surprise then that the myriad aviation guidelines that were published after DO-178 all look familiar: it is because they deliberately mimic DO-178, which actually promotes consistency. In human and universal history, specific dates are rarely important themselves; it’s rather the surrounding context that bears import. Same with DO-178: remember, we designed systems that put mankind on the moon in the mid-1960s without any DO-178. However, those rockets and lunar systems had relatively small software codebases developed by superbly smart engineers without regard for extensibility. Apollo was also not as concerned with average/weak pilot skills, untrained passengers, weather extremes, traffic avoidance, etc. However, by the mid-1970s, the rapid increase in computerization developmental dispersion of civil aviation mandated a verifiable framework of consistent avionics software engineering processes. The number “DO-177” was already taken by the 177th document in the “DO-XXX” series, so the next available number of “178” was allocated to this nascent “guideline.” An all-too-brief history of DO-178 is shown below: Remember the historical context: By the late 1970s, when the need for avionics software guidelines became necessary, true software “engineering” was in its infancy. Both “Computer Science” (coding) and “Computer Engineering” (hardware development) were maturing, but the “process” of developing large-scale or complex software was still informal. Brook’s book “The Mythical Man Month” summarized the challenges of such software development, yielding answers such as improved software requirements and communications to minimize assumptions. This was the birth of DO-178. Rather like a successful country’s Constitution, guidelines for a rapidly evolving field such as software and aviation are best served by emphasizing flexibility over prescriptive recipes. Thus, DO-178 did not, and still does not, address “how” to meet the Objectives. Instead, DO-178 describes the Objectives and how an increasing number of them must be met as the software criticality (termed Development Assurance Level - DAL) increases until reaching the maximum at 71 Objectives for DAL A software in DO-178C today. The authors of DO-178 were primarily comprised of engineers employed by the world’s largest avionics designers/manufacturers. While Boeing and Airbus (and many other airframers) design and integrate aircraft, those airframers are not heavily involved in software development. Unlike other safety-related industry standards largely developed by independent standards bodies or government personnel, DO-178 is unique in being developed by commercial engineers representing the very companies that would uphold DO-178. Fast Forward 25 Years … Because of the continued evolution in software development tools and methods, updates to avionics certification strategies need to be made. These could have been addressed via federal aviation administration Advisory Circulars (“ACs”) or even Certification Authorities Software Team (CAST) position papers. AC’s and CAST's papers were continually being published to accomplish just that. Admittedly, it would have been quicker and simpler to issue augmentation papers than to update DO-178B itself. Basically, the avionics development community was faced with making one of four choices for future avionics development and certification strategy: 1. Do nothing. 2. Give DO-178B a minor tune-up. 3. Give DO-178B a major tune-up 4. Overhaul DO-178B. Clearly, “doing nothing” was not a viable option as both technological advancements and savvy developers (some of whom increasingly gamed the system to “leverage” shortcuts) meant DO-178B was outdated. A total overhaul of DO-178B was unnecessary: unlike the major overhaul from DO-178A to DO-178B, the vast majority (over 98 %) of DO-178B was deemed” good,” so an overhaul was not needed. That leaves option “2” and option “3” above to choose from. Depending upon your perspective, the DO-178B DO-178C update, which literally changed 2% of DO-178B, was either “minor” or “major”: if considering the quite modest changes to DO-178B itself, the DO-178C updates are very minor. If instead considering the Ecosystem of the four new supplements added pertinent to the DO-178C and related aviation guidance ecosystem, the inclusive updates were quite major. Those supplements are summarized later in this chapter and dealt with in separate chapters within this book. There were two issues that needed to be addressed to breathe new viability into DO-178B: 1. Provide guidance for acceptable use of new software engineering technologies including advanced Software Tools, Modeling, Object Oriented Technology (OOT), and Formal Methods (FM). 2. Minimize the ability of savvy developers to take shortcuts while they purported to “comply” with DO-178B. Providing guidance for the acceptable use of new technologies could have been easily accomplished via ACs or CAST papers instead of updating DO-178B. However, the second objective, addressing savvy (or uninformed) developers who leveraged certain “shortcuts” available within DO-178B, was more problematic and required specific changes to DO-178B. Welcome to the next version, here today: DO-178C. Safety-critical software has obvious needs for reliability. In fact, aviation reliability is defined in terms of “safety,” where formal safety analysis is performed before and during the development of the actual software. In avionics, the safety strategy is based on ARP-4761A (see the preceding chapter on society of automotive engineers ARP4761A). However, in aviation, the software is NOT analyzed for safety: safety assessments are performed at the aircraft, system, and hardware levels, but not software. Why? Simple: “The probability of software failure is 1, as in 100%.” Now, other industries do their utmost to attempt the performance of safety assessments on software design and code. But not aviation. Simply put, software-based safety assessments are subjectively qualitative, not deterministically quantitative. However, software design and implementation are directly related to safety. Instead of prescribing some form of safety assessment upon the software itself; aviation imposes software engineering processes with verification and auditing of those processes to ensure provable adherence. But not software safety assessments. The best we can do at the software level is follow all of DO-178C’s 71 Objectives, which should roughly equate to an equivalent level of actual safety per system/hardware safety assessments. Those 71 Objectives within DO-178C are called “objectives,” not “subjective,” because they can be unambiguously and deterministically assessed. While mythology surrounds the ability to expressly determine the actual reliability, or “safety,” of software, like most mythology, the degree of fiction exceeds reality. But like mythology, we love a good story. So, the safety story of software might say that we can analytically examine software to determine how safe or reliable it is. To some degree, that is true: where algorithms or models exist, we have varying degrees of ability to mathematically ascertain or predict the software’s performance. However, the ultimate goal, or measure of the ability to predict software’s reliability, would be to answer the following question in the affirmative: “Can I prove this software is perfect? “Invariably, for all but the simpler software programs, the answer is “No.” Why? Because software is only as good as its weakest link. Consider: what do you call software that is 99.9% perfect? Obviously, “0.1% imperfect.” For avionics, then, what are the presumed odds that the 0.1% imperfection will manifest itself via an inflight anomaly? A near certainty. Therefore, we cannot probably state that the software is perfect. Thus, aviation takes a different approach. Since we cannot readily prove our avionics the software is perfect, we do the following instead: 1 – define and follow a strict development process DO-178 with increasing rigor for increasing criticality 2 – maximize error prevention 3 – recognize we cannot prevent every possible error, so institute error detection 4 - accept that error detection is good, but error mitigation is divine Since DO-178B was released in the early 90s, our knowledge of software development processes, techniques, and strategies for safety-critical software has vastly improved. In fact, if we had the same problem today as we did twenty years ago, we could almost guarantee that software errors could be reduced by over 99 percent. Don’t believe it? I’m old enough to remember automobile road trips with my parents in the sixties and seventies. Everywhere, we’d see disabled cars: flat tires, overheated radiators, broken starters. Today? Most people don’t know how to replace a flat tire, handle an overheated radiator, or jump a car. This is due to a greater understanding of the automobile problem domain by manufacturers with significantly improved reliability of those mainstream components. It’s typically the newer, less mature technologies that experience problems within our automobiles. Now, compared to avionics, the size and complexity of avionics software have increased exponentially. Very few avionics systems containing software have remained unchanged. Increasingly, software is used as both a product differentiator and a means to leap technical barriers. Software is made to do more on shorter development schedules. The solution? Adopting new software development and execution technologies. However, DO-178B could not have foreseen these new development and execution technologies. So, while the commercial world embraced the new technologies, avionics were slow to follow. Worldwide certification agencies such as european union aviation safety agency and the federal aviation administration are staffed with sharp, hard-working individuals, but typically, they have less exposure to recent hands-on software development using these new technologies. Their approval of commercial avionics is a double-edged sword: if they do not approve, the avionics don’t fly, and both innovation and conquering avionics challenges are stifled. However, approval means those systems are deemed safe by the very people who would be held partially accountable for any ensuing failures. The result? A true quandary and a difficult place to be for an avionics certification agency. However, these same agencies could see the impending need to adopt new technologies and were not sleeping. They formed groups to study these new developments and devise strategies for adoption. They engaged industry experts and technical venues to both gather and disseminate information. They wrote issue papers. They coordinated across oceans. They educated their staff and industry. They adapted. And they knew there was no way DO-178B would survive the continuing technological evolution intact: an updated version, DO-178C, was needed. Exactly what technological changes necessitated updating DO-178B? Compilers? Linkers? Microprocessors? Software test tools? Not exactly. While those products continued to evolve and improve, they were not the principal catalyst for avionics development or certification change. Instead, the technologies that drove the need for DO-178C were those specifically able to better manage the #1 challenge facing avionics software development: the growing complexity of avionics software. Fifty years ago, airplanes had no “software.” Apollo 11, launched in 1969 as the first of the lunar landing series, had a guidance computer containing 36K of ROM and 2K of RAM. It’s certain that your battery wristwatch or personal microwave oven has greater capability. Twenty years later, commercial aircraft had over a million lines of source code. Today, aircraft have over 20M lines of code with vastly greater integration and complexity. Linear growth? Hardly: it’s exponential. At the same time, the convergence of military and commercial avionics coupled with a greater need for software reusability meant that new software development techniques were needed. In particular, there were three technologies that avionics developers most wanted to leverage to improve their ability to manage this changing landscape: 1) Model-Based Development (MBD), 2) Object Oriented Technology (OOT), and 3) Formal Methods (FM). These newer technologies, coupled with the need to correct several weaknesses within DO-178B and add new Tool Qualification aspects, yielded the new DO-178C as represented below: Key Aspects Comprising DO-178C: MBD, OOT, and FM, as they relate to avionics software development, are all too briefly summarized below. Summary of MBD, OOT, and FM Model-based development – uses formal specifications and design models to describe the system, allows system and software engineers to use the same language, and enable automatic code generation from the model, typically implemented via UML or SysML Object-oriented technology – software development using objects instead of instructions, improves software portability and re-use by utilizing advanced software constructs and architecture advancements, typically implemented via C++ or Ada Formal Methods – uses mathematical and notation analysis thereof to define then analyze all aspects of a given subsystem, proving correctness of the formal notation supplants other, normal, verification techniques, particularly useful for complex mathematically based logic which is less suitable to traditional verification methods, DO-1788 Clearly, then, avionics development was embracing advanced tools, MBD, OOT, and FM technologies, and new guidance needed to be formulated to enhance safe adoption. In fact, these new technologies were not directly added to the body of DO-178, but instead, all-new supplements, one for each technology (Tools, MBD, OOT, and FM), were written. There were two reasons these new supplements were composed instead of simply adding the corresponding material to the body of DO-178: 1. By making them supplements outside the body of DO-178, other aviation-related guidelines could reference and readily apply them, e.g., DO-XXX, including DO-254 (Avionics Hardware), DO-278C (CNS/ATM Systems), DO-297 (Integrated Modular Avionics), etc. 2. DO-178C would have been five times larger, e.g., 600 pages total, if it contained the four supplements directly, thereby obfuscating readability. In addition to the four technology supplements, changes and additions were made to the body of DO-178 itself, thus becoming “DO-178C”. Unlike the revision of DO-178A to DO-178B, which was quite a major philosophical shift twenty years prior, the revisions within the body of DO-178C are relatively minor. Those revisions are summarized below: Key Revisions Within the Body of DO-178C DO-178B admittedly had a number of minor wording inconsistencies, particularly when considered with the latter guidelines, including DO-248, DO-254, DO-278, and DO-297; these were largely corrected within DO-178C. One area that many DO-178B users hoped would be more fully clarified pertained to the term “robustness”; unfortunately, this term was left largely intact, meaning there is subjectivity within robustness testing that each user must deal with. Indeed, there are so many different avionics domains and implementations that it is impossible to specify all possible manifestations of necessary “robustness.” With a few notable exceptions, DO-178C did not significantly increase the rigor required for avionics software development. After all, the DO-178C committees were wisely well-represented by the user community, and that group did not want to increase costs, schedules, or risks unduly. Kept intact was the clear delineation between “critical” software (Levels A, B, and C) and “less-critical” software, i.e., Level D. If anything, that delineation between Level C and D was increased via the additional objectives added to Level C, and also the implication that Level C moved closer to Levels A/B because of the need for proof that software structures have more coverage via requirements-based coverage. The quantitative change in objectives required for DO-178C levels is depicted below: Level / Failure Condition DO-178C # of Objectives DO-178B # of Objectives DO-178C Objectives Requiring Independence A / Catastrophic 71 66 33 B / Hazardous 69 65 21 C / Major 62 57 8 D / Minor 26 28 5 E / No Effect 0 0 0 (Prove your Level E!) Note: For Level E, all that is required is to prove its Level E via a safety assessment. DO-178C kept the same basic Planning/Development/Correctness process, but those processes must be updated to accommodate the changes described above. DO-178C’s three integral processes: Planning, Development, and Correctness: That concludes the prelude to DO-178C. Additional details are found in subsequent writings. Several questions should be coursing through the reader’s mind at this time, including: 1. Did DO-178C make my job easier or harder? 2. What if I don’t use MBD, OOT, or FM; must I still adhere to DO-178C, and if I must, what’s the difference to me? 3. I’m modifying a DO-178B application, and it must be certified on a new platform to DO-178C; what will be the impact on me? 4. Unless DO-178C is the world’s first perfect software guideline, what will be the most common areas of concern and challenges I should plan for? The above are highly relevant questions, and the answer to each is “it depends on…” The human need for explicit black-and-white answers is elusive because the questions themselves are so colorful. But there are answers, and they are generally sound.