Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 3 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification The Aviation Development Ecosystem Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines Copyright © 2021 by Vance Hilderman All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in reviews and certain other non-commercial uses permitted by copyright law. ISBN: 978-1-950336-16-6 (eBook) ISBN: 978-1-950336-17-3 (Hardcover) This book contains information obtained from hundreds of different sources, all of which were deemed by the authors to be authentic and highly regarded. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish accurate and reliable data. However, the publisher and authors cannot assume responsibility for the validity of any data, materials, or the consequences of their usage. The reader is reminded that the aviation development and certification field is continually updated, and no published data can be 100% accurate the following day. The author and publisher have attempted to trace copyright holders of all materials and apologize to copyright holders if permission was not obtained; if any copyrighted material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we can correct such in any future reprint. Aviation Press International PO Box 811547 Los Angeles, California USA 90081 Type Certificates, Technical Standard Orders, and Parts Manufacturing Approval So you understand that airborne electronics are part of a safe system, and guidelines exist that must be followed during the engineering lifecycle. Now you’re ready to start designing the avionics system … Not so fast! First, you need to know complete answers to the following questions (hint: the answers are embedded within an understanding of TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs, Type Certificate, Supplemental Type Certificate, and PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL). a. Can you normally start developing an avionics system without knowing what type of aircraft it is to be installed on? b. Are there any specific standards based on the functionality of the avionics system? c. If an avionics system was previously certified for one aircraft, must you always recertify it for a different type of aircraft? d. Can any high-quality manufacturing facility be used to produce the avionic units? If you said “No,” “Yes,” “No,” and “No” to the above four questions, then you have at least some basic knowledge of TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs, Type Certificate, Supplemental Type Certificate, and PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL’s. Regardless, the context for answering these fundamental questions is an important facet of understanding the avionics development ecosystem. For commercial avionics, flight safety is paramount. Perhaps nowhere in the avionics ecosystem is the interdependence of those safety aspects seen via an Airworthiness Pyramid with four building blocks, as depicted below: And just like a pyramid, the airworthiness pyramid has a foundation with subsequent blocks placed upon each other. First, what is “airworthiness”? Parts Manufacturer Approval: Combined design and production approval for modification and replacement items. It allows a manufacturer to produce and sell these articles for installation on type certificated products. “Airworthiness” is the provable ability for an aircraft to operate safely while performing predefined functionality. When airworthiness is proven for a commercial aircraft, an airworthiness certificate may be granted. The federal aviation administration defines an airworthiness certificate as an “FAA document which grants authorization to operate an aircraft in flight” (www.faa.gov). To receive an airworthiness certificate, federal aviation administration Order 8130 states that both of the following two conditions must be met: a. The aircraft must conform to its type design. Conformity to the type design is considered attained when the aircraft configuration and the engine, propeller, and articles installed are consistent with the drawings, specifications, and other data that are part of the Type Certificate. This includes any supplemental type certificate (Supplemental Type Certificate) and repairs and alterations incorporated into the aircraft. b. The aircraft must be in a condition for safe operation. This refers to the condition of the aircraft relative to wear and deterioration, for example, skin corrosion, window delamination/crazing, fluid leaks, and tire wear, and any outstanding airworthiness directives (AD’s). The Airworthiness Pyramid thus has the following four building blocks, summarized below with more detailed explanations to follow: Airworthiness Pyramid So the Airworthiness Pyramid has four essential, integrated building blocks which are discussed in more detail below. Remember: The Aviation Development & Certification Ecosystem Remember, avionics development is all about the “ecosystem.” Here again is a pictorial view of the key aspects of that ecosystem. Which aspect is most important? Yes, they all are. Like a chain, the system is only as strong as the weakest link. The following figure depicts the aviation development and certification ecosystem. The Details: Type Certificates, Supplemental Type Certificates, TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs, and PARTS MANUFACTURING approvals… First, what is the formal regulatory basis for aircraft and avionics certification? The fundamentals are contained in Title 14 of the US Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Aeronautics and Space, Parts: 21 (Certification Procedures for Products and Parts) 23 (Airworthiness Standards: Normal, Utility, Acrobatic, and Commuter Category Airplanes) 25 (Airworthiness Standards: Transport Category Airplanes) 27 (Airworthiness Standards: Normal Category Rotorcraft) 29 (Airworthiness Standards: Transport Category Rotor Craft) and the applicable amendment levels which typically define the primary basis for certification) Type Certificate (TC). The Type Certificate, or Type Certificate, forms the foundation of airworthiness since it affirms the soundness of a particular, specified manufacturing design. Harking back to the pre-digital age, a Type Certificate is just that: an actual “certificate” that is issued by a governing entity (FAA, EASA, CAA, etc.). However, a Type Certificate is more than a simple certificate as it specifies the applicable associated certification criteria, which vary based on the type of item being approved and the current regulatory requirements (including the applicable amendments to regulatory requirements). The Type Certificate includes or references sufficient information to demonstrate that the design being approved complies with the“applicable” airworthiness requirements. What are “applicable” requirements? Each type of aircraft or equipment has specific sets of requirements which apply to them. The set of requirements varies according to type but commonly includes TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs and compliance to DO-178C (software), DO-254 (airborne electronic hardware), DO-160 (environmental/EMI), etc. The Type Certificate includes a Type Certificate Data Sheet identifying the type design, operating limitations, Type Certificate Holder, Make, and Model, and also specifies the applicable regulations or restrictions imposed by the certifying agency (including regulations amendment levels). For components only, engines and propellers are eligible components for the Type Certificate. The Type Certificate is the foundation for subsequent approvals such as production and airworthiness. There are really two key reasons why Type Certificates form the foundation of airworthiness: 1. Type Certificates specify the applicable rules that apply and were affirmed for each item and 2. Type Certificates are required prior to actually manufacturing that item. Type Certificate Certification Plan. As with building a house, it’s very difficult to prove compliance with building standards if the inspectors are not involved before and during the building process; that is why most buildings require a plan review prior to building, then incremental reviews as the foundation, walls, electrical, and roof are installed. The same is true for aircraft and avionics, which are included as part of the Type Certificate. Type Certificate applicants must submit a detailed certification plan to the certifying agency and involve that agency or its designee throughout the project. What information is contained in a certification plan? Sufficient information to show the applicant has a thorough understanding of the applicable regulations to enable verifiable implementation of a safe design. Specifically, the Type Certificate certification plan should detail the following information and be approved by the certification authority prior to entering the engineering implementation (actual development) phase: Specific information describing “who” is applying, date, and configuration identification; Description of design (or design change, particularly for Supplemental Type Certificate (see below)) including sufficient detail in schematics or diagrams to show engineering safety; Operational environment, assumptions, constraints, and limitations; Certification basis, including applicable regulations (ARP-47XX, DO-XXX, etc.) Parts 23, 25, 27, or 29, for instance (other parts maybe applicable depending on the aircraft); Description of, and suitability for, showing compliance and how the configured artifacts will be used to affirm; Document list to be submitted which includes all required artifacts based upon the applicable regulations; List of test articles used to generate compliance data including any special instructions or characteristics; Description of how the continued operational safety requirements will be met after the Type Certificate is issued; Proposed project schedule showing key milestones, including all activities which require certification agency oversight or witness; and If federal aviation administration involved, identification of all Designated Engineering Representative’s, Designated Airworthiness Representative’s, Designated Manufacturing Inspection Representative’s, and ODARs intended for use in the certification project along with areas of responsibility and capacity. The Type Certificate applicant submits the documents to their local aviation regulatory agency, and that agency provides feedback via an iterative process until the plans are approved. Then, the applicant follows the plans with regular auditing of progress by the certifying agency or representatives. Just as with building a house, inspections are incremental to allow early visibility into progress versus plan and analysis of any deviations. It should be noted that in actual practice, the submittal of plans is usually linked to the formal application for a Type Certificate by the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM). This happens when the air conditioning is considered at a maturity point (also verified in experimental flights, authorized by “permit to fly” processes), giving confidence about the achievement of certification at a certain date. This is the typical process for a Type Certificate. The process for TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER/European Technical Standard Order is different since the submittal is to an ACO or european union aviation safety agency in front of the regulation, and it is independent of the certification of a given aircraft. A certified aircraft can be used as the “testbed” for the specific avionics being submitted. i In Europe, the submittal is done directly to the european union aviation safety agency proper central directorate (depending on the type of Aircraft), then european union aviation safety agency defines a Program Certification Management organization and the specialist Panels, one per specialty, which may include specialists from their central offices and/or applicant’s National Aviation Authority specialists. If the applicant has been granted a Design Organization Approval (DOA) and has appointed Compliance Verification Engineers (CVE) for the different specialties, european union aviation safety agency also defines its Level of Involvement (LOI) in the auditing process of each auditable subcomponent. The Certification Verification engineers perform the auditing process in any case, with the european union aviation safety agency specialist's participation as per the LOI. An Aircraft Type Certificate is usually “validated” by national Airworthiness Authorities when sold to a Customer willing to fly in nations other than the USA or European Union. Validation between the USA and EU is facilitated by the bilateral agreements underwritten between the federal aviation administration and the EASA. Since aviation regulations are undergoing continual revision, what happens to certification projects when the regulations change? To avoid a seemingly endless cycle of project updates to meet evolving regulations, the regulatory basis is considered “frozen” for a reasonable period of project implementation. Thus, the regulatory requirements cited in the approved plans become the basis for the Type Certificate even if those regulations change before the final certification is completed (note that there are exceptions to this). This usually precludes the situation where an applicant would have to change the design just because an unforeseen regulation change happened. Design Changes. “There are only two types of avionics designs: those that have already changed, and those that will.” (Vance Hilderman – 2014) Commercial aviation is barely a century old, and its evolution is continuous. Evolution means change. Change means some form of re-certification. What happens when a change is desired for an already-approved Type Certification (Type Certificate ) design? Typically, there are three possibilities: 1. Simple re-certification, where the change is considered Simple and doesn’t require extensive analysis of safety implications due to the change (modification to the Type Certificate ). The classification of the change is solely dependent on the potential safety effect. Example: Add an human factors radio when keeping the standard two very high frequency radios active and installed. In such a case, only the installation and EMC/EMI rules need to be verified: an extra human factors radio is considered a “no hazard” piece of equipment as its operation does not affect other equipment within the Type Certificate configuration. Note that re-certification can be done for Minor and lower changes by the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER owner or by a Type Certificate holder with a Design Organization Approval (DOA). All other cases require re-certification with the involvement of the Certification Authority. 2. Re-certification via a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) where the change may not be simple, but it doesn’t introduce new designs with associated safety considerations. The current understanding of a Supplemental Type Certificate is that it is“additive” to an existing Type Certificate, i.e., building “on top of” an approved design, typically adding functionality to avionics or “kits” to an aircraft configuration. A Supplemental Type Certificate is applicable to specific identified Aircraft serial numbers. 3. Create an entirely new design and repeat the certification process but use (leverage) many of the pre-existing artifacts (previously developed type design data). This is applicable to avionics, but not at the Aircraft level (there is only ONE Type Certificate for a given Aircraft; if you do another Type Certificate, it is by definition another aircraft type (this is why the Type Certificate is a Type Certificate). Clearly, aviation safety would be maximized by always starting over and creating a new design, correct? Absolutely not: starting anew simply allows new mistakes to creep into an all-new design while also becoming so expensive as to dissuade new safety-related capabilities from being incorporated. If the change is particularly simple, option #1 above is the simplest choice. If the change introduces new safety risks that were not considered in the previously approved design, the certification entity may require the onerous option #3 above. However, if the change can be managed within the previously approved safety context, then a Supplemental Type Certificate may be used, as described below. Type Certificate Validity. The holder of a Type Certificate must keep the Type Certificate valid by continuously following airworthiness directives (ADs), managing service bulletins, and providing technical support as required (and almost always charging for such). This is commonly referred to as “supporting the type” and often continues after the item has ceased production (and the same rules apply to Supplemental Type Certificates described below). If the Type Certificate /Supplemental Type Certificate holder stops supporting the item, the certificate is relinquished back to the certifying agency, and usage of that item is then disallowed for commercial aircraft operations. Supplemental Type Certificate (STC). A Supplemental Type Certificate is a Type Certificate but for an item that has a previously approved Type Certificate following a modification to that item. When the manufacturer shows the modification does not introduce risks not considered in the original design, that manufacturer typically requests a Supplemental Type Certificate instead of an all-new Type Certificate because a Supplemental Type Certificate is less work than an all-new Type Certificate. The Supplemental Type Certificate details the nature of the aircraft design change and how the modification affects the previously approved design, including the application of existing regulations. The scope of a Supplemental Type Certificate can vary widely, depending upon the nature of the modification. A Supplemental Type Certificate is a typical vehicle by which new avionics systems (appliances) are installed on an aircraft that has a current and active Type Certificate. The aircraft installation will require the design and alteration of the aircraft so that the subject appliance can be installed on the aircraft. Like the Type Certificate process, a certification plan (Project Specific Certification Plan – PSCP) is developed, and this plan defines the Supplemental Type Certificate plans and certification basis. Typically Supplemental Type Certificate projects follow a prescribed process: Planning (PSCP), installation design, installation, pre-certification testing, type inspection authorization (TIA), including flight test risk assessment, installation conformity, formal (for certification credit) ground testing, and formal (for certification credit) flight testing. As part of the Supplemental Type Certificate process, an Experimental Airworthiness Certificate (EAC or Permit To Fly (PTF) as it’s called in Europe) may be issued prior to conducting the formal TIA, including conformity and ground and flight testing. Compliance with the regulatory requirements is substantiated by developing a series of documents that demonstrate compliance; the following is a typical list of documents developed for a Supplemental Type Certificate project: 1. Supplemental Type Certificate Application 2. Project Specific Certification Plan (PSCP) 3. Conformity Plan 4. Master Data List (MDL) (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 approving this document) 5. Human Factors aspects of Certification Plan (HFCP) (as required) 6. Instructions For Continued Airworthiness (ICA) 7. Airplane Flight Manual Supplement (AFMS) (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 recommending approval of this document) 8. Certification Compliance Matrix Check List (Designated Engineering Representative review) 9. EMI/RFI Ground Test Procedure and Plan (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 approving this document) 10. Ground Test Function Test Procedure and Plan (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 approving this document) 11. Flight Test Plan Test Procedures and Plan (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 recommending approval of this document) 12. Request for Type Inspection Authorization (TIA) 13. Wiring Diagram 14. Installation Instructions 15. Wire Routing 16. Wire Harness Drawing 17. Equipment Installation Diagram 18. Electrical Load Analysis 19. Special Conditions / Issue Paper (only required for unique, novel, or Supplemental Type Certificates that require compliance in areas not currently controlled by federal aviation administration regulations) 20. Installation Kit List 21. Placard Drawings 22. Structural Substantiation Report 23. Weight and Balance 24. Supplemental Flight Test Report (post-TIA) (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 approving this document) 25. Supplemental aircraft conformity inspection 26. System Safety Analysis (SSA) (aircraft level) (Designated Engineering Representative 8110-3 approving this document) 27. Mechanical / Structural Drawings (as applicable) 28. Pitot / Static Drawings (as applicable) 29. Aircraft Experimental Airworthiness Certificate aircraft owner authorization letter 30. Aircraft Experimental Airworthiness Certificate program letter 31. Application for Experimental Airworthiness Certificate (8130-6) 32. Installation Conformity and Statement of conformity (8130-9) Typically, most, if not all, of the data items listed above will need to be developed by the Supplemental Type Certificate applicant in order to substantiate compliance with the Supplemental Type Certificate regulatory requirements. The applicant for a Supplemental Type Certificate can be the owner of one or more Aircraft or even a separate organization, typically a major Avionics Supplier, not necessarily the same as the original Type Certificate holder. In some instances, the rigor and effort required to comply with the Supplemental Type Certificate certification requirements for a Part 23 aircraft (Normal, Utility, Acrobatic, and Commuter Category Airplanes) as compared to that of Part 25 aircraft (Transport Category Airplanes) is less thus requiring a reduced level of effort. Once the entire Supplemental Type Certificate certification compliance package is completed and submitted to the regulatory authority, the final processing of the Supplemental Type Certificate can be completed, and the applicant will be issued the Supplemental Type Certificate. Technical Standard Order (TSO). A TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER (or ETSO – European TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER) comprises a unique set of performance and interface standards (MPS) for a specified item used on commercial aircraft. A “TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER Authorization” means a certification agency has reviewed and affirmed that the specified item meets the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER MPS (design and production requirements), and the manufacturer is able to proceed with production; therefore, a TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER comprises both “design” and “production” approvals. However, depending upon the item type, a TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER is a design/production approval; a TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER is not an installation approval. The installation approval must be obtained separately; it may not necessarily imply an ability to proceed with installation on an aircraft. An aircraft typically has dozens of different computer-based systems onboard, with large commercial aircraft containing over one hundred unique systems. Since each system performs different functions, many of those systems must be shown to provide basic capabilities that are common to that type of system; these basic capabilities are thus termed “minimum performance standards.” Therefore, TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER embodies those minimum performance and interface standards for an associated system type. TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs cover many items common to civil aircraft, including avionics systems. For avionics, TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER coverage includes primary flight instruments and other systems such as autopilots, radios, stall-warning, air data computers, AHRS/ADAHRS, wind shear, flight management systems, GPS, etc. Some devices only comply with a portion of the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER requirements; these TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs are referred to as partial TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs. As the name implies, partial TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs are for devices that provide a portion of the total TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER function. Applicants developing a partial TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER device will need to coordinate their plans with the certification authority well in advance of beginning any development work to ensure the certification authority agrees with the certification basis and partial TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER basis. TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs are written by the regulatory authority and are generally supported by document orders (DOs) developed by federal advisory committees such as RTCA. The development of DOs includes input from a loosely integrated group of international organizations, users, and regulatory authorities. These DOs (such as RTCA/DO-178C Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification) form an integral part of the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER requirements and are generally referenced in the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER. One important note: as TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER’s are important and official federal aviation administration recognition of approval, TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER’s are only extended to foreign manufacturers meeting all TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER requirements AND manufacturing in a country with a recognized bilateral agreement applicable to the avionics item in question. For example, as of this writing, the USA does not have common bilateral agreements with Turkey, whereas european union aviation safety agency does; therefore, Turkish manufacturers can often apply for and receive European Technical Standard Order, whereas obtaining a TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER (FAA) is more problematic. Importance of TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER’s. Aside from comprising a mandatory standard for common avionic items, TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER’s are important for a number of additional reasons: Important Aspects of TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER’s and Special European Considerations TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER, then, is an important layer within the Airworthiness Pyramid for avionics; they provide a common repository for additional operational characteristics for common avionics systems. For more complex or less mature avionics systems, it is common for TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs to be more frequently updated to thus “evolve” the minimum operational requirements for that system type. A TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER update may or may not obviate prior versions of that TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER, but updated TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER will clearly state whether or not such is the case. It should be noted that european union aviation safety agency is now regarding federal aviation administration TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER approvals as of limited value, not only if the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER is outdated, but in general, since the ACO TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER process, especially for changes, is sometimes regarded as a “quick fix” way to obtain approval; more so when the equipment provides 10% of functionality as per TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER MOPS, and 90% as extra functionality. european union aviation safety agency requires every TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER equipment (and even European Technical Standard Order) to fill in questionnaires regarding the regulations followed (ACs, DOs, etc.) explicitly, and, in particular, how the design assurance for functions NOT specified by the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER has been achieved. Proceed with knowledge and caution. Example: TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER. To help understand TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER fundamentals, consider TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER-C63d, titled “Airborne Weather Radar Equipment.” The title contains the acronym “TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER,” so it is clearly a Technical Standard Order. The classifier “C63” is a unique designation allocated to airborne weather radar equipment. The revision letter“d” means it is the fifth revision of TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER-C63 since the second revision would have been the “a” in “C63a”. This TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER–C63d is 15 pages in length with a specified “Effective Date” of 2/28/12, meaning new weather radar certifications after February 28th, 2012, need to meet the standards specified in TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER-C63d. What does TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER-63d specify? Key contents include: a. “Purpose.” Describes what functionality is covered by this TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER, which in this case is forward-looking wind shear capability. It specifically excludes flight guidance system functionality, which is covered elsewhere. b. “Applicability.” States that this TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER is for new airborne weather systems planned for development after the effective date (February 28, 2012) and that the prior versions of this TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER are canceled. c. “Requirements”. Detailed enumeration of requirements covering minimum airborne weather equipment functionality, failure condition classifications, the functional and environmental qualification must meet radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-173 and DO-220, Software, and Hardware qualification must meet radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-178 and DO-254, data and documentation requirements, d. “Minimum Performance Standards.” Actual criteria for measuring and reporting applicable weather data for wind shear detection, plus details on simulating and testing this weather data functionality. TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER-C63d is a typical TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER in terms of its size, format, and organization. But like all TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDERs, its content is specifically tailored to meet the needs of the subject system “Weather Radar,” in this case, wind shear functionality contained within airborne weather radar systems. Parts Manufacturer Approval (PMA) PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL is a combined design and production approval for modification and replacement articles that allows a manufacturer to produce and sell these eligible items for installation on type-certified products. PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL approval is an approval of the manufacturer's Fabrication and Inspection System (FIS). A TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER-ed device does not also require the applicant to obtain PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL since the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER is a design and production approval. PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL approval can be obtained for a replacement part utilized by a TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER device, but in these cases, the installer must place their modifiers nameplate on the TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER device. Parts produced under a Time Supplemental Type Certificate or Field Approval are not eligible for PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL. Standard parts, such as nuts, bolts, etc., do not require PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL. For certificated aircraft, PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL is the basis by which it is normally required for devices that can affect safety to be installed on certified aircraft (this is not the case for experimental aircraft). PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL is not a general approval of inspection procedures, materials, or processes; PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL approval is only applicable to a specific device and specific processes and procedures for that device. Manufacturers who hold a PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL can make and sell replacement parts even though they were not the original manufacturer of the aircraft or the originally installed item. PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL can be used to produce modification parts from supplemental type certificates (Supplemental Type Certificate). In these cases, once a Supplemental Type Certificate is issued, the approval of the Supplemental Type Certificate then becomes the basis for approval of a new or modified part, and the PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL for that new or modified part will be issued shortly after the Supplemental Type Certificate is issued. PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL increased in importance as air travel proliferated and evolved. Aircraft owners/operators do not want to be held hostage to a single supplier for the life of their aircraft, so they want alternate sources for parts. Conversely, certification authorities recognize that aircraft safety resembles a large, complex chain with safety only as good as the weakest link within that chain; unapproved parts could readily become that weakest link, thereby affecting safety. Obtaining a PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL normally requires two distinct and sequential activities, depicted below: Three Methods for Obtaining Approval of the PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL part design Method 1. PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL by Identicality by Showing Evidence of a Licensing Agreement (this is not a separate approval method, but is actually a means to substantiate identically): Often, this method is used to obtain PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL via a Supplemental Type Certificate licensing agreement. In this case, the PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL applicant establishes a licensing agreement with the Type Certificate /Supplemental Type Certificate/TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER holder, and the type design data from the Type Certificate /Supplemental Type Certificate/TECHNICAL STANDARD ORDER is used to substantiate identically. Method 2: PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL by Identicality without a Licensing Agreement: In this case, the applicant submits a statement certifying that the design is identical in all respects to an approved design. Generally, if the applicant does not have access to the original design data (in the case of complex or sophisticated parts), it is nearly impossible to obtain PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL identically without a licensing agreement. Method 3: PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL by Test and Computation: This method is, as it sounds, a comprehensive set of Test and Computation data demonstrating compliance with the applicable airworthiness standards. The two sequential activities for obtaining a PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL are further described here: Step 1: Proving Safe Design. The part to be manufactured must first be shown to have a safe design (airworthy). How is a “safe design” shown? Remember, avionics certification is about “proving your innocence” because, unlike typical laws, aviation safety is predicated upon the “guilty until proven innocent” paradigm. For PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL, the applicant must “prove” the design is safe by: a. Proving that all applicable certification regulations and standards have been followed. Depending upon the part, for example, some combination of DO-178 (software), DO-254 (hardware), DO-160 (environmental testing), etc., may apply, along with Advisory Circulars (ACs) and possibly other dos and requirements. b. Lacking a licensing agreement per “Method 1” above, additional analysis can be used to show that the part is acceptable. For simple designs, this analysis could be an inspection of the part and then a comparison with similar approved parts to show that the new part has the same safety attributes as the already approved part. For more complex designs, the analysis could be tests and calculations that directly prove the part meets all federal aviation administration safety standards. Note that for parts containing hardware or software logic, this Analysis could not be used to replace the need for DO-254 or DO-178, and this option is invalid. Step 2: Obtaining Production Approval via Conforming QA. After Step 1 above has been accepted, the next step is to obtain actual production approval for the part. Why is this step necessary if the design has already been shown to be safe and meet all standards/regulations? Simple: Consider healthy lifestyles and a person who has the “recipe book” for healthy food, exercise, stress reduction, and sleep. “Owning” such a recipe book hardly guarantees implementation – to live a healthy lifestyle requires diligence, time, money, and no junk food binges. The same is true for safe aviation parts: the manufacturer must prove they follow the safe design and are able to manufacture it consistently while having provisions for defect detection and prevention. The process of “proof” combined with defect detection and prevention is a Quality Assurance (QA) function whereby QA proves “conformance.” This ensures that parts will be shipped to end-users only when they meet all requirements of the approved design, regulations, and standards. PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVALs cannot be transferred, and they are valid until surrendered, withdrawn, or terminated (usually by the certifying agency). PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL data can be sold (usually under license, as mentioned above), but the buyer does not automatically receive permission to produce. Why? Simple: the latter two characters of “PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL” stand for “Manufacturing Approval,” and it’s the very manufacturing processes, facility, and quality assurance ecosystem that must first be approved. So a buyer of PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL data, even via a license, is obligated to obtain their own PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL, though such should be easier when procuring a licensed design that previously had its own PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL. Additional notes regarding PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL are summarized below: Key Notes Regarding PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL’s PARTS MANUFACTURING APPROVAL’s thus form an important part of the Airworthiness Pyramid. Since 2011, greater emphasis has been placed on a manufacturer’s quality system; certification agencies such as the federal aviation administration recognize such and regularly audit for conformity as part of their ongoing certification management process. Conclusion The Airworthiness Pyramid provides an easy means to understand the seemingly disparate aspects of avionics-type certifications. The details lie across thousands of pages of applicable rules, standards, guidelines, regulations, and orders. By following the pyramid approach described herein layer by layer, certification is no more difficult than climbing a tall, curved ladder: time, strength, courage, and perseverance are all that is required. Enjoy the climb; the view from the top is truly outstanding.