Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 9 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification Aviation Requirements for Systems, Software & Hardware Good requirements are the foundation of good products, and the only road to “great” products is through great requirements. In aerospace (or aeronautics), requirements are paramount for all aspects of products: hardware, software, systems, safety and now security. But how can one “prescribe” good requirements? What should an aerospace (or avionics) Requirements Standard contain? What are examples of weak, satisfactory, good, and finally great requirements? Are there differences between airborne and ground-based requirements or software and hardware requirements? Aerospace viability mandates we have the answers to these questions and so here they are… First, please consider the following aviation requirements “quiz”. Do you know the answers? If you’re developing aviation systems, it is imperative to know the answers. These answers and many more are explained in this and the following chapters. 1. T/F: On most aviation projects, most requirements pertain to Safety. 2. T/F: Aviation requirement development must follow a Waterfall. 3. T/F: The best way to assess aviation requirements is via test execution. 4. T/F: ARP47XX and DO-XXX provide clear guidance for developing and accessing requirements. 5. T/F: Most avionics defects are due to bugs and manufacturing defects. 6. T/F: When using model-based development, requirements must be textual and external to the model. When asking certification authorities “Which is more important: requirements for airborne avionics systems, hardware, software, or ground-based systems? “the truth is that the most valid and likely answer is “Yes”. Any other answer could lead the questioner to mistakenly believe they should prioritize one over the other. As concluded by many safety-critical development experts (and this author’s various books and papers), requirements are the foundation of aviation development. Worldwide safety-critical experts consistently state that the number one cause of safety-related defects can be traced to weak requirements. Such weak requirements imply reliance upon assumptions, with different engineers making different assumptions. Where assumptions are different, it follows that at least one of those assumptions is, or all of them are, incorrect. However, all the aviation guidelines relied upon by aviation certification authorities are vague concerning methodologies for optimal requirements development. While many mistakenly believe this to be a weakness of these guidelines, the truths are three-fold: 1. Aviation systems differ vastly in functionality, criticality, and chosen development methodologies; therefore, no single requirements-writing guide would be sufficient. 2. Reliance is instead placed upon the requisite detailed “Requirements Standard” which each aviation project prepares, detailing that project’s specific approach to requirements development and criteria for assessing such requirements. 3. Gifted original designers have less need of detailed requirements than mere mortals. However, the vast majority of aviation systems are not “original” but rather continuing upgrades and variations of prior systems. Therefore, modifications are made not by the Originator but by less-informed engineers. And the verifiers, auditors, and certifiers of these systems never have the Originator’s level of product expertise. All of these non-originators strongly rely upon the Requirements to understand and assess the aviation product. A Word on “V&V” … Imagine a conversation between an all-too-typical aviation engineer and a non-engineer: Non-Engineer: “What did you do today?” Engineer: “I did V&V.” Non-Engineer: “What is V&V?” Engineer: “Verification and Validation. Or maybe Validation and Verification.” Non-Engineer: “Did you do Validation, or did you do Verification?” Engineer: “Yes, I did V&V.” Non-Engineer: “But did you do Validation, or did you do Verification?” Engineer: “Well, no one knows the difference so that’s why we just call it ‘V & V’! “ Non-Engineer: “Engineers are strange …” Engineer: “Yes.” V&V is actually easy: Verification: does the implementation meet the requirements? Validation: are the requirements ‘right’’? Now, ask the certification authorities which is more important: verification or validation. The politically correct answer is “Yes” again because verification should not have less importance than validation and vice versa. However, ask a truly experienced aviation engineer which is more important, and the only good answer should be: “Validation, because without good requirements it won’t matter if you’ve verified them well!”. That is exactly right, however what constitutes “good requirements”? Validation of requirements ensures they are correct and complete. For aviation software, validation is performed via hardware at the system level, therefore software requirements are technically validated via review (note that modeling via DO-331 greatly assists here by providing requirements visibility and validation via multiple levels from customer to system to hardware and software). For hardware and system requirements, however, validation includes review, simulation, modeling, bi-directional traceability, analysis, and any other combination of requisite techniques to ensure completeness and correctness. As aviation system complexity continually increases, a single level of requirements is insufficient. Perhaps early aviation could suffice with a single level of requirements but increasing complexity and larger engineering teams implies greater potential for mistaken assumptions. Remember from prior chapters herein: the number one cause of aviation system/software/hardware defects is “assumptions”. The best means to minimize assumptions is via improved requirements. Therefore, aviation systems have multiple levels of requirements including: 1 – Aircraft requirements per ARP4754A or ground based large-scale enterprise system requirements including those per DO-278A 2 – Safety requirements per ARP4671A may also include security requirements via DO326A 3 – Aircraft System requirements per ARP 4754A 4 – Hardware requirements per DO-254 5 Software requirements per DO-178C and DO-278A, and aeronautical data via DO-200B Each of the above requirement domains likely represents successively increasing granularity, in the order depicted above. Throughout, additional Safety requirements can be decomposed or derived which further clarify necessary aspects of the system, hardware, and software. When systems are particularly complex, any one of the above requirement domains may be further subdivided into two or more levels of requirements. The end result is typified by multiple levels of requirements which enable higher quality through better understandability of the requirement relationships, and the ability to better validate, and then verify, those requirements. Aviation requirement development entails successively more detailed decomposition, with the requirements reviewed at each stage of refinement. For higher assurance levels associated with Hazardous or Catastrophic failure effects, requirement V&V must be proven to be independent, e.g. a different person or team following a process independent from the requirement developer. In the case of software and hardware logic, it is increasingly common for complexity or software size to be so large that no single person understands more than a fraction of that logic. Therefore, airborne avionics (DO-178C) and ground/satellite-based Communication Navigation Systems / Air Traffic Management (CNS/ATM; DO-278A) software requires a default of two requirements levels: High-level Requirements (HLR’s) and Low-level Requirements (LLR’s); good hardware developers following DO-254 often apply two or more level of requirements as a “best-practice” even though such is not formally required within DO-254. System requirements must embody the full system level (black-box) functionality including Safety requirements. System requirements are then decomposed and allocated to either hardware, software, or both. Software high level requirements’ then state what the software does at the hardware/software interface level; high level requirements’ should be devoid of software function/module level detail as that is instead specified via low level requirements’. It should be noted that a “best-practice” is to include these hardware/software interfaces (HIS) within a separate HIS document. The reason for two levels of requirements (high level requirements’ then low-level requirements’) is fundamental: while simple software functionality may be fully described via a single level of requirements, avionics software is complex and becoming more so. Therefore, requirement elucidation, implementation, and verification are more reliably performed when specification is performed in two or more stages of refinement. The figure below depicts the aviation requirement ecosystem; note that “derived” requirements must also be included as such is necessary to address safety aspects (dissimilarity, heath monitoring, etc.) and gap-filler requirements to ensure all functionality is addressed requirements and can thus be fully traced and verified. These derived requirements do not necessarily trace to a parent requirement, therefore require additional independent review for Safety. In earlier versions of aviation guidelines, such as DO-278 and DO-178B, the formal objectives associated with high level requirements and low-level requirements were particularly vague; there was seemingly no formal mandate to “go back and improve requirements”. DO-178C and DO-278A improved that by mandating that low level requirements be quite detailed down to logic branches and forcing requirement improvement (usually via low level requirements clarification) when structural coverage analysis indicated uncovered code structures due to weak low-level requirements’. Therefore, legacy systems, particularly ground-based CNS/ATM systems, have been commonly noted by this author and his employees to contain rather weak low level requirements’. Requirement Terminology: Aviation requirements have a unique taxonomy, somewhat different than non-aviation industries. The intricacies of key aviation requirement terminology and application are detailed in the following paragraphs. Aviation guidelines do not provide a recipe for composing requirements, nor do they define a distinct boundary between high level requirements’ and low level requirements’, or between low level requirements’ and Design. Instead, each project is responsible for providing such a verifiable “recipe” via a formal Requirement Standard by which the requirements will be evaluated. However, best practice is to first fully define the requirements (high-level, and low-level as appropriate) prior to design. Regardless, the design must be reviewed by considering all related requirements, both high-level and low-level. Remember: all requirements are subjected to Test, whereas design is not tested but rather documented and reviewed. Since all requirements are subjected to testing regardless of their designation as high-level or low-level requirement, the actual distinct boundary between High and Low is less important. Now, if you have perfect decomposition of high-level requirements to low-level requirements, and you fully test the low-level requirements, must you still test the high-level requirements? The answer is “Yes, since both high-level and low-level requirements are inputs to the test review process, you must consider both high and low-level requirements when reviewing the test. In real-life, there are no such thing as “perfect” requirements and test cases should be developed prior to designing and implementing the software so that that consideration of test cases can be used during the requirement review process to improve those very requirements. High-Level Requirements. high level requirements’ development follows System requirement definition but precedes low level requirements development; high level requirement’s must be formally reviewed (see below) prior to development of the associated low-level requirement’s. The following graphic provides the key reasons why high level requirements are necessary for any aviation system potentially having a safety and security impact and thus requiring software and hardware certification: high level requirement’s are the “bridge” between System requirements and low level requirement’s. Good high level requirement’s should address and elucidate the following software aspects: functionality, external interfaces, performance, quality attributes, design constraints, safety/security. high level requirement’s (and low level requirement’s below) which are ascertained via analysis (or decomposition) of System Requirements or System Architecture are termed “on-derived” because of that direct system relationship. high level requirement’s which come from Safety-Related Requirements are usually called non-derived but the derived/non-derived designation is less relevant because that high level requirements inherits the “safety” attribute from its safety source, so it must be fed back to the Safety process (this is the real (ARP4754A and DO-178C, but not the former DO-178B) reason for “derived” and “safety” requirements: all such must be independently reviewed by Safety as part of that formal Safety Feedback process (which must also be audited by Software Quality Assurance and by Systems Process Assurance). high level requirement’s which come from analysis of Safety Assessments (as opposed to analysis of Safety Requirements) are ALWAYS “Derived” requirements (no parent) and also must have the Safety attribute set for requirements management. Low-Level Requirements. low level requirement’s follow high level requirements requirement definition and precede or accompany design; low level requirement’s must be formally reviewed (see below) prior to development of the associated logic. The following graphic summarizes why low level requirement’s are necessary for any aviation software potentially having a safety and/or security impact and thus requiring software and hardware certification: low level requirement’s are the “bridge” between high level requirement’s requirements and Design/ Implementation. Good low level requirement’s should elucidate the following software aspects: high level requirements clarification, internal SW interfaces, function/method parameters, robustness attributes, most logical decisions, all run-time instances. Aviation: Fix the Requirements or Fix the Product? A key facet of aviation requirements is early validation. Validation assesses the correctness and completeness of requirements. Since validation requires hardware considerations, requirements need to be validated inclusive of System and Hardware considerations. All requirements must be verified, with verification consisting of formal Reviews and later Testing; where Testing is not conclusive, additional Analysis may be required. Obviously, it is better to improve requirements prior to implementation as defect prevention is more cost-effective than defect correction later. Verification, on the other hand, asks the question, “Does the implementation meet the Requirement(s)?” All requirements must be formally reviewed, where “formal” means provable use of review criteria along with record-keeping and defect correction. There are five inputs to a formal requirement review; all five must be under configuration control and proven to be used to perform the actual review. These five inputs (which include derived requirements if applicable) to a formal requirement review comprise the entry criteria, whereas the completed requirements review checklist and action item/defect records comprise the exit criteria. This movement from activity entry to exit comprises a “transition”. The requirements verifier performs the transition and quality assurance audits the transition. For reviews, the number of reviewers is unimportant (in fact, it is this author’s experience that the best reviews are accomplished when fewer but better reviewers are used; team size in complex systems is generally inversely proportional to resultant quality and most certainly productivity.) The key to the requirements review is the application of the corresponding Standard and as well as the Checklist. Typical high-quality safety-critical requirements standards are detailed and 20+ pages in length; high-quality requirements review checklists are similarly detailed and 6-8+ pages in length. This contrasts sharply with non-safety-critical products which often lack requirements standards and checklists, or, when present, are still very light. In the earlier aviation guidelines, requirement necessity and quality was recognized but less enforced. Today’s guidelines require continual requirement refinement such that both defects and logic testing coverage shortfalls entail a primary remedy of improving requirement clarity. DO-178C and DO-278A went even further and require tests to affirm software code coverage (“structural coverage”) to be based upon requirements. This means low level requirement’s must be very detailed and provide sufficient detail to be used in code reviews for the logic decisions. Derived Requirements: English versus “Avilish” Years ago, this author held a holiday party for over one hundred of his international aviation engineer employees. His spouse noted the engineers spoke a unique blend of English which was heavily influenced by aviation terminology, much of which she could not understand. They surmised that even the native English-speaking engineers really didn’t speak English but rather “Avilish” (rather Aviation English), which became the company’s slang for “Aviation English”. In Avilish, normal English terms took on an entirely different meaning. Perhaps the most significant transformation of aviation English is the usage of the term “derived requirement”. Now, in proper English and even American English, the term “derived” means “to come from”. For example, “the human’s DNA is derived from its parents”, and “an optimal travel route can be derived from examining a map”. So much for regular English … In aviation, the term “derived requirement” is defined as “a requirement derived from a safety assessment process or engineering decision to mandate particular functionality or capability which may be unrelated to any parent requirements and to close functionality gaps not otherwise decomposable from parent requirements.” Safety-critical systems almost always have safety-related aspects which directly or indirectly improve safety: redundancy, built-in test, health monitoring, etc. all comprise safety-related functionality which may be devoid of parental requirements mandating such specific safety aspects. The simple analogy is your office building: quite likely, your office has smoke detectors, sprinkler systems, and a secondary door; these items do indeed perform their respective functions, but they are safety related and therefore not functionally required for use of the office. That smoke detector, sprinkler system, and secondary door will hopefully never be used; but like the requirement to have a seatbelt and airbag in your car (also Safety requirements), they are derived from a safety assessment or to meet specified safety requirements and therefore are termed “derived” for aviation. Therefore, in aviation these aspects are deemed to be specified via derived requirements per the aforementioned definition. Examples of aviation derived requirement aspects include the following: Safety requirements such as health monitoring for reset, deactivation, or switchover System sampling rates Redundancy Fault logging/reporting Architectural choices: triplex versus dual-monitored Watchdog timer strobe frequency Dissimilarity Definition of hardware/software inputs and outputs. Now, you could call all the above “Functional Requirements” by simply adding parent requirements for such. But since Safety related requirements must be shown to have been fed back to the Safety process for official (and documented) Safety review, such designation of Safety requirements as instead Functional requirements could potentially bypass the requisite Safety review. So don’t do that. Instead, call the baby horse a foal, not a horse, and give it the proper nurturing and review attention it deserves: “Derived (safety) Requirement”. Requirements = “What”, Design = “How” Everyone knows, or should know, that requirements state what measurable functionality will be performed, whereas design states how the functionality is then implemented. However, consider a designer versus an implementer: designers improve their designs by prototyping, and prototyping is implementation. When the implementer changes implementation, they often alter the design. Therein lies the dichotomy: the boundary between requirements and design is indeed vague, and such vagueness implies subjectivity which belies assumptions. This is particularly true in aviation: when an aircraft requirement, a system requirement is a software/hardware requirement is a design decision? Whew. Let’s proceed … In the case of aviation software, both airborne and ground-based, the associated certification guidelines DO-178C and DO-278A, respectively, require high-level requirement development to precede high-level requirement development. High-level requirements should always be devoid of design detail. However, low-level requirements are considered to be tangential to, and a part of, software design which includes both architecture and low-level requirements. Making Good Requirements & Requirements Standards Have you ever watched professional billiards players? To a casual observer, they seem skilled but also often lucky. Not only do they rarely miss, but the cue-ball lands in perfect position for the next shot. Good amateurs make the shot, while professionals actually plan several shots ahead and win the game by running the table. This is the difference between professionals versus amateurs. In aviation, luck is rarely involved except for bad luck when you read about the crash the next day. Most aviation accidents are not caused by pilots but rather the pilots’ inability to mitigate. However, that is a topic addressed separately. Just as professionals plan several moves ahead, aviation engineers must do the same when developing requirements. Aviation requirements should be based upon the desired end-result. Instead of making the amateur mistake of trying to think of textual requirements one-by-one (as in amateur billiards), the professional should envision the endgame, e.g. what exactly comprises a successful aviation system with all its interactions. The aviation guidelines provide precious little information on how to develop requirements, as such development techniques are highly subjective and thus difficult to assess. Guidelines such as DO-178C (airborne software) and DO-278A (ground/satellite-based systems and software for Communication and Navigation plus Air Traffic Management – CNS/ATM) instead cite “Objectives”, including objectives for assessing requirements. They are called Objectives for the simple reason that the criteria for assessing Objectives can be unambiguously applied. However, good requirements also have subjective criteria which are not mandated or even addressed within the aviation guidelines; such are subjective and thus not assessable by the generic Objectives within the guidelines. How then do aviation certification authorities ensure inclusion of such subjective requirements assessment criteria? Simple: that’s the purpose of the mandated Requirements Standard mandatory for DO-178C, DO-254, and DO-278A (and highly recommended for ARP4754A). Aviation guidelines call for the developer to create and apply a mandatory Requirements Standard for the higher assurance levels, e.g. those levels where a system failure could cause injury or worse. Now, back to the endgame: developing successful aviation systems. While the aviation certification guidelines do not require any particular methodology or approach to developing requirements, the developer is required to prove compliance. Therefore, the aviation certification guidelines “require” the following artifacts to be present prior to developing requirements: 1 – developing plan, describing requirements development strategies 2 – requirements standards, specifying criteria for composing and evaluating requirements 3 – requirements evaluation checklist, to be used in reviewing requirements 4 – traceability matrix, depicting bi-directional linkages between successive levels of requirements, code, and tests The above four inputs to the aviation requirements development process need to be defined prior to initiating requirements development and the subsequent evaluation of those requirements needs to use all four inputs to ensure guideline-compliant processes were followed. What separates the amateurs from the professionals within the game of development of requirements? Efficiency, accuracy, and quality: Efficiency: elucidate the requirements early and with minimal iterations. Accuracy: ensure requirements are correct and complete. Quality: ensure requirements are compliant meeting all transition (input) criteria, with review and audit records. To accomplish requirement development efficiency, accuracy, and quality, it is necessary to think like professionals and consider the endgame first. For amateurs, the goal of aviation requirements is to satisfy customer expectations via meeting customer requirements. For professionals, the endgame or “goal” of successful aviation systems is more encompassing: comply with all certification guidelines, satisfy safety and then functional requirements including those of the customer, interface cleanly with other systems, and promote reusability. In other words, the professional requirements developer is planning several moves in advance and considering much more than the next move of simply meeting customer requirements. What then are the attributes of professional aviation requirements? The following summarizes; note that every effort should be made to promote reusability of existing technologies – aviation is already complex and need not be made more so: Correct and complete – accurately describes the functionality to be delivered in its entirely Feasible – Possible to implement within the known capabilities and limitations of the system and its environment Necessary – defines a necessity or is required for conformance an external requirement, an external interface, or a standard Prioritize – Is essential, with its relationship to other requirements defined in terms of priority to those other requirements Unambiguous – Only one interpretation of the requirements can be drawn, by one implementer and one verifier or by many Verifiable – can assess or test to ascertain correctness of implementation Weak Requirements Weak requirements abound everywhere, but typically not for the assumed reason of incompetent or unknowledgeable engineers. Instead, weak requirements are commonly the result of the opposite condition: smart engineers believing the requirements to be for their or other equally smart persons’ benefit or weakly expressed goals between themselves and managers/customers. Therein lies the problem: the truth is that the other engineer’s needing to read the requirements in order to verify, or in the future change, the stated functionality most certainly do not have the knowledge of the original creator or implementer. If systems are relatively small or engineered solely by exceptionally brilliant engineers (think national aeronautics and space administration and the early space program), aviation requirements are, frankly, less important. As the systems become larger and more complex, a greater number of engineers are required which drives the average skill level closer to the definition of “average”. Those are the engineers whose systems suffer the most from weak requirements. Truth be told, the vast majority of aviation development is built upon evolutionary progression of prior aircraft and systems; it’s quite rare to have an all-new aircraft or system Thus rarely are the original developers of aircraft and systems fully involved in the derivatives so weak requirements lose this necessary knowledge of the originators. Consider the following obviously weak requirement: “The System shall, as a goal, calculate aircraft heading, altitude, and global position to a sufficient accuracy.” Obviously, the preceding requirement is weak. However, if we examine this requirement word by word, we realize that requirement is actually very weak. “The System”: Insufficient. Which system? What version and configuration? “as a goal,”: Insufficient. Goals are not requirements and cannot be assessed. “calculate”: Insufficient. Calculate how? What Algorithm? When? How often? “aircraft heading”: Insufficient. True heading or magnetic? Accuracy? “altitude”: Insufficient. Above sea level or terrain? Feet or meters? Resolution? “and global position”: Insufficient. Lat/Long or GEOREF? Resolution? “to a sufficient accuracy”: Insufficient. Entirely unclear as to tolerance. In fact, there is only one “good” word in the aforementioned requirement: the word “shall”. Keep it and fix everything else. Requirements versus Goals & Subjective Desires A common problem with safety-critical systems is stating system goals as if they were requirements. Goals, like New Year resolutions, are wonderful ideas and everyone would benefit from having them. However, goals cannot be objectively assessed and guaranteed. The following are common aviation goals that are all too often expressed in requirement format: “The aircraft must be safe.” “Serious accidents cannot occur.” “Passengers & crew can never be killed or injured.” The above are truly great goals, but they are not requirements. Another problem often seen in requirements is expressing them via subjective desires. Humans have infused subjective desires into their communications since the beginning of the written word. Distances (“far”, “short”), size (“large”, “small”), and temperature (“hot”, “cold”) were phrases recorded in early human languages. But what exactly is their meaning? The reader can imagine a general idea but nothing discreetly verifiable. Consider the following subjective words: Immediately Respond Short Simultaneous Modular Nominal The above words are commonly found in safety-critical requirements but should be replaced with objective terms. The following requirements were taken from aviation requirements specifications received by this author in his prior life as Co-founder/CEO of the world’s largest aviation certification services company; they are not objective requirements and, in fact, are barely even weak goals: The software shall be robust. The hardware shall degrade gracefully under stress. The software shall be developed in accordance with modern programming practices. The system shall provide the necessary processing under all modes of operation. Computer memory utilization shall be minimized to accommodate future growth. The software and hardware shall be easy to use. Clearly, developing great requirements entails a unique mixture of science, art, skill, and practice and knowledge about the global system functionalities and capabilities (don’t promise the moon to expect for your fiancée). However, it also requires good Plans, Standards, Checklists, and methodologies. The following best practices are not required by the aviation guidelines as they cannot be objectively assessed, but they should be embodied within the requirement engineering lifecycle: 1 – Include requirements examples within the requirements standards 2 – review requirements in small batches of related functionality 3 – review requirements in context of full bi-directional traceability, using all associated linkages during the review process 4 – include details for error-handling, tolerances, built-in-test, and reset; these are the common areas of weak requirements in aviation 5 – use detailed professional checklists to review requirements 6 – write test cases based upon requirements as part of requirements review process, improve the requirements based upon identified test-case shortfalls. While the above best practices are not required, anyone developing aviation requirements without incorporating them is relying upon luck to succeed. Amateurs hope for luck; professionals plan for success. We can all be Professional.