Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 8 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification DO-254 Avionics Hardware DO-254 has been called “DO-178’s Little Sibling.” Like many little brothers and sisters worldwide however, the term “little” is often wrong and in a few areas the relationship itself is suspect. DO-254, or more properly, “Design Assurance Guidance for Airborne Electronic Hardware,” was created as an obvious response to three simultaneous and related events: 1. Firmware was playing a larger role in avionics, with developers rapidly leveraging increased silicon-based designs; 2. The avionics firmware development process was unregulated, with certification performed after-the-fact at the system, black-box level; and 3. Evidence was surfacing which indicated some manufacturers were intentionally moving logic from “software” to silicon-based “firmware “to avoid software’s DO-178B mandate. While embedded avionics software engineering made huge strides and inroads in the eighties and nineties, silicon-based firmware development was considered an informal adjunct art form. But what is “firmware”? When does “soft “become “firm” become “hard”? DO-254 – A Brief History. Two decades ago, silicon-based “firmware” was relegated to specialized functions within avionics as compared to its highly varied and rapidly expanding role today. There were multiple reasons early firmware was more limited in aviation: 1. Firmware development tools provided limited flexibility compared to software; 2. Firmware was difficult to change once burned or loaded into silicon devices. Easier to use FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY’s didn’t come into the forefront of programmable devices until the mid-1990’s and more conservative aviation was slower to adopt; Firmware was considered a less desirable option than software due to a seemingly more difficult debugging and update process, largely due to the preceding #1 and #2. While there was truth in each of the aforementioned reasons, smart engineers coupled with more capable development environments assured the evolution and adoption of firmware within avionics. In particular, great strides in Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA’s) brought such firmware to the forefront of aviation. With FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY’s, all of the aforementioned restrictions on firmware adoption were dramatically reduced. FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY’s increasingly leveraged very modern development tools, were easy to update, and allowed for potential flexibility and execution speed advantages over software-based logic. Certification (both civil and military) authorities require assurance that avionics hardware is developed with consistent and deterministic processes replicating those of the software development lifecycle with key differences noted herein. However, traditionally hardware could be exhaustively tested since it was considered “simple”. For such simple hardware, all of the input/output combinations could reasonably be tested and therefore hardware was tested as such as part of systems testing. However, silicon-based firmware can be just as complex (often more so) than software and all input/output combinations cannot be reasonably tested and therefore it is considered “complex”, not “simple”. More on complex and simple hardware later. But DO-254 requires hardware development processes consisting of Hardware Requirements, then Conceptual Design, then Detailed Design, then Implementation, then Validation and Verification, then Production Transition; all throughout these processes are background processes of configuration management and process assurance (similar to software’s quality assurance). Design Assurance Level (DAL) C and D hardware development is performed black box, meaning primarily Requirements, Tests of Requirements, Traceability, and Reviews of the requirements and tests are required, inclusive of Process Assurance. However, DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL A and B hardware add white-box, meaning standards, reviews, and tests for actual logic design/implementation. Traditionally, hardware development differed from software development in the following ways: Software complexity outpaced that of hardware. Hardware development teams were more senior, and smaller, than software. Much of the hardware could be gradually prototyped with testing done in parallel. Many aspects of hardware development could be inspected or exhaustively tested. But with the advent of modern Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) technology, then FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY’s, those differences between software and hardware dissipated. Therefore, the focus of DO-254 has evolved to more of a focus upon complex electronic hardware (“CEH”, e.g. silicon-based logic), with Certification Authorities Software Team (CAST) Memorandum #27 followed by A(M)C 20-152A further refining DO-254’s interpretation and focus. As a result of this evolution (or almost “revolution”) in silicon-based logic, avionics developers increasingly exercised the choice of implementing logic via silicon instead of software. However, DO-178 did not strictly apply to silicon-based logic and there was no regulatory counterpart for such; thus silicon-based logic could potentially avoid the certification rigor associated with software, even though the logic may have a nearly identical purpose between software and silicon. Thus, the need for DO-254: to ensure that hardware and logic developed specifically for avionics purposes underwent a similar development and certification regimen as if it had been implemented via software using DO-178 … DO-254 (and its counterpart ED-80 in Europe) was originally intended to cover all electronic hardware including Line Replaceable Units (LRU’s), Circuit Card Assemblies (CCA’s), Commercial-Off-The-Shelf hardware components, Simple Electronic Hardware (SEH), and Complex Electronic Hardware (CEH). It is important to remember than DO-254 was written as a counterpart to DO-178B, not DO-178C, and in a period when “hardware “meant everything “physical” within a system as opposed to today’s emphasis upon hardware’s more prevalent complex silicon-based logic. Later publications including federal aviation administration Advisory Circular (AC) 20-152, Certification Authorities Software Team (CAST) memorandum 27, and european union aviation safety agency configuration management SWCEH-001 clarified and in some cases reduced the scope of DO-254 and ED-80. Particularly in the USA, DO-254 was employed with a greater focus on custom complex electronic hardware versus the other hardware aspects cited above. Why? Because complex electronic hardware employs “logic” (Hardware Design Language, very high-speed integrated circuit hardware description language, etc.) and logic resembles software code: provable safety and quality require planning, standards, and incremental assessments because after-the-fact verification is not as effective as “process” to ensure that quality. Also, avionics developers in the USA had an earlier application of ARP4754A to avionics which required formal processes, requirements, and testing of hardware irrespective of DO-254. European, South American, and Asian counterparts were originally less likely to apply ARP4754A, so they used DO-254 to help ensure certification coverage of hardware. Today, DO-254 is an integral part of the Avionics Development Ecosystem. DO-254’s Role Within the Avionics Development Ecosystem Modern electronics employ sophisticated hardware and software whose quality cannot be fully assessed solely by end-item testing. Thus the processes used to engineer the associated hardware and software are important and those processes must be planned, assessed, and controlled; DO-254 describes those processes for avionics hardware. As depicted in the preceding figure, avionics hardware development adheres to DO-254 but also considers the safety assessment and system development activities which surround that avionics hardware process. There is continuous involvement of both Safety engineering and Systems engineering so that adherence to, and feedback of, safety requirements and systems requirements is managed inclusive of bi-directional traceability. DO-254 is: A flexible framework for the development of airborne hardware containing avionics-specific functionality. Able to accommodate almost all types of hardware ranging from sensors, multiplexers, switches, and aggregated simple silicon devices, in addition to full-featured FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY’s and APPLICATION SPECIFIC INTEGRATED CIRCUIT’s. A guideline which tries to cover a nearly infinite spectrum of hardware varieties thus lacks specificity for particular projects. Like software, the term “airborne electronic hardware” from DO-254’s title is wide-ranging. At the beginning and end of the day, hardware is part of a system or more specifically an aviation ecosystem. Therefore, for civil aviation, DO-254 is preceded by a safety assessment per ARP4761/A and an avionics system development process per ARP4754A; military aviation is gradually adopting a similar (in some cases identical) safety/systems process. And the hardware itself will typically be required to undergo environmental testing via DO-160. Therefore, DO-254 is merely one link within the avionics certification ecosystem. Avionics hardware cannot be provably safe nor compliant without this ARP4761/A and ARP4754A safety/systems foundation which both precedes and accompanies DO-254. The DO-254 process employs detailed project-specific planning followed by continual assessments and process feedback loops to ensure defined hardware development processes specified in those Plans and Standards are followed. The preceding two chapters on DO-178C explained the need for and content of the five plans plus three standards. For an overly simplistic view of the DO-254 lifecycle process (without depicting requisite feedback loops, changes, reviews, etc.), this author’s opinion is that the following comprises an optimal DO-254 engineering development lifecycle Starting with Safety then Development Assurance Levels. Modern civilizations (and a few ancient ones) propounded a theory of “equality” amongst citizenries. While applicable for real life, the avionics ecosystem is anything but. Consider a car: while modest debate could ensue regarding the relative contribution toward safety of different systems such as steering and brakes, no one would seriously propose the car radio is equally important. In avionics, the difference in contribution towards flight safety between systems is more pronounced and formally regulated. A safety assessment per society of automotive engineers ARP4761A is commonly performed for each system where the safety assessment and functional hardware analysis postulate “what are the potential failures and what is their impact?”. This safety assessment directly affects system and hardware design including redundancy, fault detection, mitigation, etc.; in fact, the safety assessment is used in the determination of system and hardware architecture and Development Assurance Level (DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL). Each unique system has such a DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL and the hardware (termed Item Design Assurance Level) within that system most often has a criticality level equal to that of the system (termed Function DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL). DO-254 has specific objectives based upon that hardware’s DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL. There are five DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVELs associated with airborne avionics systems, noted as level A through E, with level A being the most stringent. For software, under DO-178C, the differences between levels are greater than they are under DO-254 and each software DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL has distinctly discrete Objectives ranging from 26 objectives for DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL D to 71 objectives for DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL A. Overly simplified, DO-254 levels A and B are nearly identical with strict criteria applied to the engineering processes associated with each line of hardware logic; levels C and D are less rigorous and focus upon hardware black-box requirements/testing and lack consideration of hardware logic development and test. Level E requires no additional hardware design certification under DO-254. The rigor applied to planning, development, and correctness of the hardware is directly associated with its DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL, often referred to as “criticality level.” These five levels with increasing rigor from Level E to the most stringent Level A. Verification, Validation, and Process Assurance. These Integral Processes must be shown to have used evaluation by an individual other than the originating engineer where that individual also performs their evaluation using a different process. For example, verification includes reviews, tests, and analysis. As previously noted, the DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL greatly affects process rigor applied to hardware via DO-254. Again, the DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL of the hardware is usually, but not always, the same as the System DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL. Why? The system contains hardware which is necessary to perform its functionality, and that hardware is expected to directly correlate to the system’s contribution toward flight safety. However, this principle cannot always hold. For example, the author of this paper worked on one DO-254 project where the System was DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL B, the Software was DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL B and DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL D, but the FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY was DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL C; in that case the FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY was used to merely translate data packets which were checked both upstream and downstream via software. Such is the interesting thing about rules: for each one, an exception can be found. Process Assurance is like Quality Assurance but with a larger scope including auditing of hardware suppliers and manufacturing transition processes. Process Assurance has five primary activities; keep records of audits and metrics, audit HW suppliers, audit product transition, assess engineers conformance plans, standards and checklists, ensure projects' plans, standards, checklists comply DO-254. Process Assurance differs from software’s quality assurance because hardware’s Process Assurance must audit hardware suppliers and ensure subsequent system manufacturing processes are documented, repeatable, and conform to plans. Since hardware’s Process Assurance has these two additional roles versus software’s Quality Assurance, it has the different name “Process Assurance”. Scope of DO-254 DO-254 applies to most avionics hardware, however more recent interpretations and application of DO-254 focus upon Complex electronic hardware as noted previously. Why? Because the Simple hardware is definable via black-box requirements and those requirements (and thus all the Simple functionality) can be tested at a black-box system level for example as already required under ARP4754A. For Simple hardware, the significant additional cost of detailed planning, detailed design, and low-level verification activities prescribed by DO-254 provide little added-value hence are normally not required unless a specific certification authority deems them necessary in a particular instance, for example because ARP4754A was not otherwise applied. Therefore, the most common application of DO-254 is PLD, APPLICATION SPECIFIC INTEGRATED CIRCUIT, FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY, and DO-178 is BSP, real-time operating systems, approach SW, Math, and Drivers. DO-254’s Planning Process Wise persons know “What gets planned, gets done”. Wiser avionics authorities know “What gets planned thoroughly can be assessed more thoroughly”. Accordingly, DO-254 requires a detailed planning process consisting of five Plans and four Standards: The plans; Plan for Hardware Aspects of Certification, HPAC, Hardware Configuration Management Plan, Hardware Development Plan, Hardware Verification & Validation Plan. Plan for Hardware Aspects of Certification. The Plan for Hardware Aspects of Certification (PHAC) is the foundational planning document of an avionics hardware system. The Plan for Hardware Aspects of Certification provides an overview of the avionics system’s hardware, safety criteria with respect to DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL, and planned certification activities as noted; Describe systems, hardware, interfaces, relationships to software. Concise less than 40 pages, overview hardware activities. Show DO-254 compliance objectives, point to other project, plans and standards, address DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL/Safety Address special considerations; tool quality, Commercial Off-The-Shelf, SOC, IP, Service history, issue papers. Include top level schedule: SOIs Hardware Process Assurance Plan. The Hardware Process Assurance Plan (HPAP) describes the planned process assurance activities with respect to planning, audits, transition criteria, and conformity reviews. Note that DO-178C had “Quality Assurance” (QA) whereas DO-254 terms that activity “Process Assurance” (PA). The primary PA activities are keep records of audits and metrics; audit HW suppliers, audit production transition, assess engineer’s conformance to plans, standards, checklists; ensure project’s plans, standards, checklists comply with DO-254. Primary DO-254 Process Assurance Activities Note that two of the activities in the above figure are highlighted in yellow: those are unique to hardware’s PA role and not formally required in DO-178C’s QA role. The Hardware Process Assurance Plan primary topics are summarized as follows; describe project PA processes to encompass DO-254 PA objectives: Audits, Transition Criteria, and independence; Describe PA’s involvement in Planning SOI;s and Certification; Affirm PA independence, audits, and record keeping; PA’s assessment of transition, suppliers, manufacturing, conformity review; Make company-generic re-use with few changes. Hardware Configuration Management Plan. The Hardware Configuration Management Plan (HCMP) describes the planned configuration management activities to ensure hardware baselining and change management activities provide for configuration replication/ repeatability as noted in the following: Specify all processes pertaining to managing hardware configuration; Defines baselining, reviews, changes and releases; ensures all delivered hardware be replicated in future and ensures no unwarranted changes; defines or references problem reporting, change control, tracking and authorization; covers ALL artifacts, plans, Standards, HW documents, environmental, tools, files, reviews and audits. Hardware Development Plan. The Hardware Development Plan (HDP) describes the planned hardware requirements, conceptual design, detailed design, implementation, and integration activities as noted in the following: Development environment, tools, process and strategy for requirements, design, logic, and integration, development environment, tolls, processes and strategies for requirements, design, logic, and integration. Relationship and transition criteria between engineering phases. Includes or references all review criteria for requirements, design, implementation and integration. Hardware Verification & Validation Plan. The Hardware Verification & Validation Plan (HVVP) describes the planned hardware requirements validation and hardware verification (reviews, tests, and analysis as applied to requirements, design, implementation, and integration) applicable to assess the hardware. Remember: “Validation “ensures requirements are complete and correct whereas “Verification “ensures the implementation meets those requirements. Officially Verification and Validation are equally important, however this author always advises that Validation is more important: if the requirements are not correct and complete, then it doesn’t matter if they’re verified! Remember, the Hardware Verification & Validation Plan describes the means to verify both the human hardware engineering decisions which went into the hardware, and the resultant end-hardware. Hardware development, particularly for silicon, requires a plethora of tools to design, simulate, synthesize, and manufacture silicon and circuit boards. All the human decisions made in using those tools must be documented and verified, in no small part so that subsequent engineers can evaluate those decisions and ultimately change the hardware if defects or new capabilities are needed. The Hardware V&V Plan is where those V&V activities are documented, and it is summarized as: Objectives and strategies to verify requirements, design, implementation and integration. Relationship of functional and robustness testing and element/structural analysis and where is performed. Includes or references checklists for all V&V activities Covers HW and SW test, regression analysis Test and independence Describer transition criteria for verification and validation The Standards. DO-254 is wisely silent on prescribing particular avionics hardware development criteria since no one-size-fits-all recipe could be practical to the myriad forms of hardware. Instead, DO-254 requires the hardware developer to define detailed Standards for the four key engineering phases and then assess subsequent compliance to those Standards. That assessment is performed by verifying the associated hardware artifacts using retained and configured checklists which capture the criteria contained within those Standards. The four key DO-254 hardware engineering phases requiring Standards are: Hardware Requirements Standards, providing criteria for identifying, specifying, and tracing the applicable functional and derived requirements. Hardware Design Standards, providing criteria for documenting the conceptual hardware design then the detailed hardware design including all internal and external interfaces. Hardware Verification & Validation Standards, providing the techniques, scope and criteria for validating, reviewing, testing and analyzing the hardware requirements and implementation. Hardware Archive Standards, providing techniques for capturing and storing hardware artifacts with sufficient granularity to enable replication of all such artifacts in the future. A good way to understand the application of DO-254’s four standards is to consider that DO-254 itself covers the more objective (measurable) aspects of the hardware development lifecycle, whereas certain aspects are more subjective yet equally important. Those subjective areas are hardware requirements, hardware design, hardware archival, and hardware V&V. Since each avionics project must have its own processes and assessment criteria for these subjective areas, such are specified within the four project-specific Standards thus making these “subjective” aspects “objective” for each project. While most of the aviation guidelines are self-contained, DO-254 is unique: because it was originally intended to address all non-software aspects of a system, and there was very little complex hardware logic, numerous adjunct documents were continually added to address the evolving hardware landscape. A common question on DO-254 projects is “Does hardware need both high-level and low-level requirements like DO-178C’s software?” The basic answer is “No – hardware only has one level of requirements but has two levels of design: conceptual design then detailed design”. However, smart practitioners will understand the providing low-level requirements prior to implementing software reduces the number cause of software defects: assumptions. Similarly, hardware logic developers would be well-advised to ensure their single level of hardware requirements was sufficiently detailed. A common question when applying DO-254 to silicon-based logic is “Does DO-254 require logic reviews similar to DO-178C’s software code reviews? “The quick answer is “Yes”. While not explicitly described within DO-254 itself (since DO-254 preceded the mainstream utilization of Hardware Design Language/very high-speed integrated circuit hardware description language in silicon/FIELD PROGRAMMABLE GATE ARRAY’s), such information was added to the DO-254 ecosystem via issue papers and advisory circulars (AC’s). The following figure depicts the necessary inputs and outputs to a hardware logic review. Note the ‘transitions” from pre-to-post-logic review which are performed by engineers and audited by hardware Process Assurance. Hardware Validation & Verification As described in the preceding chapter, software is not validated in DO-178C since validation requires assurance of “completeness” which cannot be obtained until hardware/system testing of that software. While it’s easy to incorrectly intermix the terms “validation” and “verification”: Verification means Does the implementation meets requirements? Validation means Are the requirements, right? So, what then really is validation for hardware? It’s actually quite similar to ARP4754A’s aircraft and system requirements validation. The primary methods for hardware validation are specified in the project’s Hardware Validation & Verification Plan and summarized following: Validation methods: Bi-directional traceability; Analysis; modeling; test; similarity; engineering review; may require multiple methods; validation must consider both intended and unintended function. Since hardware DO-254 had the advantage of re-purposing software’s DO-178C, the verification principles of DO-178C largely apply to hardware: reviews of all artifacts associated with DO-254 compliance, tests of hardware implementation to requirements and assessment of logic coverage for DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL A/B, and additional analysis when the preceding combination of reviews and tests is not fully conclusive. DO-254’s verification regimen of Tests, Reviews, and Analysis is summarized in the following: Tests: hardware requirements-based testing, Logic testing Reviews: Requirements, conceptual and detailed design, logic, requirements-based tests results, low level tests results review. Analyses: traceability analysis, requirements coverage analysis, low level test coverage analysis, structural coverage analysis, general system analysis, pin coverage analysis. The Hardware Validation & Verification Plan should cover the additional recommendations below: Specify exactly what you will review, when you will review it, by what criteria (reference checklist), and by whom Specify exactly what you will test, when you will test it, how will you test it, and by whom Specify what, if any, additional analysis will be performed Specify goals and objectives, rather than detailed “how to” Reference, not include, standards and checklists Address validation of derived requirements Describe different forms of verification and the environment for each Make it company generic: re-used on other projects with minor changes Hardware versus Software Traceability Another typical question regards traceability: “Does DO-254 need bi-directional traceability and is it similar to software?” Again, the short answer is “Yes”. Hardware and Software Traceability As denoted in the graphic above, traceability is always bi-directional and includes System level requirements, hardware/software requirements (but not Conceptual Design or Architecture), tests, and implementation/logic. Hardware conceptual design, and software architecture, do not require explicit inclusion for traceability; however, the tracing of requirements to logic “passes through” design; the key is that such design cannot obfuscate traceability. Commercial Off-The-Shelf Hardware and IP Cores Whereas aviation software usage of Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) software generally mandates full application of DO-178C, Commercial Off-The-Shelf hardware is more ubiquitous in aviation and more easily used in certifiable systems. Instead of redesigning hardware merely to comply with DO-254, the prevailing certification authority strategy is “Don’t introduce new errors via new hardware designs but rather retain proven electronic components while demonstrating good engineering management of that hardware. That good engineering management is demonstrated via an Electronic Component Management Process Plan (ECMP). Commercial Off-The-Shelf Hardware Electronic Component Management Plan Summary & Usage Another frequently asked DO-254 question pertains to IP Cores “Does DO-254 have special rules for IP Cores or can I simply use any IP Core?”. For this question, there is not a simple Yes/No, because IP Cores were largely non-existent in aviation at the time DO-254 was composed in the later 1990’s. However, IP Cores are increasingly prevalent and provide many advantages including reuse, quality, and time-to-market similar to software libraries and real-time operating systems (RTOS’s). Hardware IP Cores: Hard stall speed Soft stall speed Firm While Commercial Off-The-Shelf IP Cores have generally undergone in-the-field debugging and the manufacturers have a vested interest in product quality, they still must be subjected to thorough requirements-based testing including robustness. For DESIGN ASSURANCE LEVEL’s A and B, additional support from the manufacturer is required to ensure provable in-house development and configuration management processes are also applied. Where software development evolution has included model-based development and object-oriented technology (subjects dealt with in subsequent chapters of this book), basic software development usage of a high-order source language, compiler, and linker is rather staid, and little changed. Not so with hardware whose evolution has been extreme within aviation. Previous chapters of this book explained the rather small changes in software certification per DO-178A DO-178C. Obviously DO-254 could have benefited greatly from more frequent updates, or in fact a single update; such never occurred. Instead, the “application” of DO-254-based hardware certification was changed via more frequent ancillary certification memorandums such as AC 20-152, CAST-27, european union aviation safety agency CM-SWCEH-001 and acceptable means of compliance 20-152A, the latter of which was drafted in 2019 and approved in 2020.