Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 4 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification The Aviation Development Ecosystem Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines Copyright © 2021 by Vance Hilderman All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in reviews and certain other non-commercial uses permitted by copyright law. ISBN: 978-1-950336-16-6 (eBook) ISBN: 978-1-950336-17-3 (Hardcover) This book contains information obtained from hundreds of different sources, all of which were deemed by the authors to be authentic and highly regarded. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish accurate and reliable data. However, the publisher and authors cannot assume responsibility for the validity of any data, materials, or the consequences of their usage. The reader is reminded that the aviation development and certification field is continually updated, and no published data can be 100% accurate the following day. The author and publisher have attempted to trace copyright holders of all materials and apologize to copyright holders if permission was not obtained; if any copyrighted material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we can correct such in any future reprint. Aviation Press International PO Box 811547 Los Angeles, California USA 90081 ARP4761A Aviation Safety 4761, 4754 … Magic Numbers or Real Answers? Aviation safety does not rely upon magic numbers but begins by determining real answers. Likewise, aviation safety is never an accident, but true mathematically-based Safety should prevent accidents. The numbers “4754” and “4761” are not magic but are associated with aviation safety. Safety and the Numbers have evolved – the new answers for aviation development and safety are found in 4754A and 4761A; specifically the Society of Aerospace & Automotive Engineers (SAE) ARP4754A (Aircraft & Systems Development) and ARP4761A (Safety Assessments). The Old Days. In technology, the Old Days refer to any time prior to last year. In the Very Old Days (moon landings, space shuttles, new commercial jets with four engines), safety was addressed by brains and refinement: smart engineers did their best to prevent accidents, then refinement was applied when those best efforts were less than perfect. In the Very Old days, computing horsepower was thinner, schedules were fatter, and acceptable safety generally ensued: space shuttles had a 98.5% chance of not exploding, and commercial aircraft had fatal crashes “only” a few times annually. Then, the very old days gave way to mere old days, and the very old ways didn’t work as well. Some said the engineers were not as smart, while others said those engineers were trying to make the computers too smart. However, all agreed that more formalized safety was needed, and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) had been handling Aerospace Recommended Practices (ARPs) for decades. society of automotive engineers ARP4754, Guidelines for Development of Civil Aircraft and Systems, was published in November 1996. Its tightly-coupled sibling ARP4761, Guidelines and Methods for Conducting the Safety Assessment Process on Civil Airborne Systems and Equipment, was published the next month, December 1996. ARP4761A is rather more than a guideline for aircraft safety. ARP4761A (formally issued in 2018) is officially titled “Guidelines and Methods for Conducting the Safety Assessment Process on Civil Airborne Systems and Equipment”. In fact, ARP4761 is almost a tutorial on generalized safety and how to apply various theoretical analysis to assess ongoing development activities toward aircraft safety. Clearly, ARP4761A is tightly coupled with ARP4754A and lays the foundation for the most fundamental aspect of aircraft regulations: Safety. Clearly, viewing the aviation development and certification ecosystem, ARP4761A’s prominent place in the upper left conveys its importance: The Safety Assessment process is a vital aspect of aviation safety, and for aircraft and avionics, ARP4761 (and its newest version ARP4761A) provides the foundation. Literally every aspect of aviation undergoes safety assessment to better understand potential risks, quantify them, and then prevent, detect, or mitigate them. Experienced aviation persons are truthful when stating the safety assessment process is perhaps the most important element of avionics development. For avionics, the role of the safety assessment is to ensure the safety of the aircraft, its crew, and the occupants. Essentially, aircraft safety is optimized by performing careful analysis, architectural optimization, criticality level determination, component selection, architectural improvement, monitoring, and maintenance. Therefore, only by having a thorough safety assessment process can we ensure we have an architecture with additional safety-related requirements that address safety aspects. The title of ARP4761 accurately justifies its importance within this fundamental process: “Guidelines and Methods for Conducting the Safety Assessment Process on Civil Airborne Systems & Equipment” In an ideal world, avionics safety assessments would follow a one-size-fits-all approach consisting of uniform safety analysis steps. And in that same ideal world, humans would never be sick, gain weight, or age. Unfortunately, the ideal world cannot be assured, which begets the fundamental premise of safety assessments: analyze potential problems for the real, not ideal, operating conditions. Thus, safety assessments are vital, especially because aviation has no ideal world: developers of critical avionics systems spend an inordinate amount of time involved in the myriad “what if” worst-case scenarios associated with potential and realized faults. Clearly, then, if all avionics developers were perfect geniuses and could postulate and solve all possible safety scenarios in their heads, they would not need a written formal safety assessment process because they performed perfectly already. But who reviewed it? How was consistency across assessments assured? What about future system changes? Is an undefined process really a process? And who is really an infallibly perfect genius? As the answers to these questions are all obvious, so is the need for a formal safety assessment process; ARP4761 provides the basis for that process, and at 300+ pages within that Guideline, the words here can only be a mere summary. However, to understand and apply ARP4761, the practitioner needs to understand the overall safety context and its relationship to other documents. Aviation safety is codified by a large ecosystem of information dissemination and regulations. Every individual with even an indirect role in aviation safety is governed by rules that, at a minimum, require procedures to be defined and followed. In most cases, additional regulations provide rules or guidelines covering “how” the tasks are to be performed and the minimum threshold that must be attained to achieve certification. The aviation aspects governed by safety-related regulations include: Aircraft pilots and crew Ground operators Maintenance personnel Air traffic control, communications, navigation, etc. Systems, hardware, and software development, including airborne and ground-based Tools including mechanical, hardware, software Virtually all aspects of aircraft manufacturing Flight testing Suppliers, manufacturing, updates For avionics, the set of regulations is helpfully focused; the avionics safety assessment process primarily utilizes the following relevant industry and government documents: society of automotive engineers ARP4761/A – Guidelines and Methods for Conducting the Safety Assessment Process on Civil Airborne Systems and Equipment society of automotive engineers ARP4754A – Guidelines for Development of Civil Aircraft and Systems federal aviation administration Advisory Circular AC23.1309-1E – Equipment, Systems, and Installations in Part 23 Airplanes federal aviation administration Advisory Circular AC25.1309-1A – System Design and Analysis federal aviation administration Advisory Circular AC27-1B – Certification of Normal Category Rotorcraft federal aviation administration Advisory Circular AC29-2C – Certification of Transport Category Rotorcraft radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-160 – Environmental Conditions and Test Procedures for Airborne Equipment radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-178C – Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification radio technical commission for aeronautics DO-254 – Design Assurance Guidance for Airborne Electronic Hardware If the information herein were on overall aviation safety or even aircraft safety, the scope would expand greatly. But the purpose here is purely upon individual avionics systems. The safety assessment process utilizes experienced engineers (versed in the above documents and regulations) to proceed through a series of analyses pertaining to the system and aircraft. As the safety assessment proceeds, the following documentation typically accompanies the various analyses: Aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment (FHA) Aircraft Fault Tree Analyses (FTAs) System Functional Hazard Assessment’s System Fault Tree Analysis System Failure Modes and Effects Analyses (FMEAs) Item Fault Tree Analysis Item Failure Mode and Effects Analyses A key to the above is “Traceability”: it’s imperative that relationships between aircraft operations, maintenance, systems, etc., be codified and linked to that process, which is termed “traceability.” In the Old Days, traceability could be handled manually or by large, institutionalized database-intensive tools. However, those manual and large-tool processes did not readily provide visibility into the relationships, safety assessments, evolution, review evidence, and derived requirements (requirements which are “derived” from a safety assessment, added to clarify a design/implementation decision or to fill a gap). Aviation safety involves four key safety activities, as depicted in the figure below: The world of “safety” has its own language and lexicon. Experienced safety engineers are well versed in this language, but you probably do not read these words if you are an experienced avionics safety engineer. To begin, please ponder the following words and test yourself by verbalizing a 1-2 sentence definition for each word (answers follow, but please spend just a few minutes pondering these words yourself before looking at the answer. Remember, you didn’t learn to drive a car by simply reading the user manual: the real learning continuing airworthines management exposition when you practiced driving): Adverse Effect? Assessment? Average probability per flight hour? Complex System? Design Assurance Level? Extremely remote failure condition? Extremely improbable failure condition? Failure condition? Minor? Major? Hazardous? Catastrophic? Functional hazard assessment? Hazard? Primary Function? Primary System? Reliability? Secondary System? Simple System? System? OK, you’ve pondered the above words. What is their meaning when applied to avionics safety? First, there is no mandatory definition that everyone in the world adheres to or must follow. If you were to examine the dozen most common sources of aviation terminology, you would discover numerous minor differences within definitions of these terms—and some of the differences are not so minor. The various authorities and authors try to maintain consistency; in aviation, this is called “harmonization,” such as when the USA’s federal aviation administration and Europe’s european union aviation safety agency coordinate to resolve differences. But your world is the real world, and that world is constantly evolving with an ever-expanding lexicon. In keeping with the coincidental but unrelated Heisenberg Principle, we should never expect perfect consensus on all definitions. So before using the following definitions, research any binding regulations that apply to your avionics activities and reach an agreement with any approval agencies by citing the reference source and definition itself within your avionics documentation. With those WWW (wary wise words), here are what this author believes to be the most commonly accepted definitions: Assessment: An evaluation based upon engineering judgment. Average probability per flight hour: A representation of the number of times the subject failure condition is predicted to occur during the entire operating life of all airplanes of a type, divided by the anticipated total operating hours of all airplanes of that type. Complex System: A system whose operation, failure modes, or failure effects are difficult to comprehend without the airport information desk of analytical methods or structured assessment methods. Development Assurance Level (DAL): All of those planned and systematic actions used to substantiate, at an adequate level of confidence, that errors in requirements, design, and implementation have been identified and corrected such that the systems and items (hardware, software) satisfy the applicable certification basis. The five levels of Development (or Design) Assurance Level are named A, B, C, D, and E, with “A” being the highest and“E” the lowest. Extremely remote failure condition: Those failure conditions are not anticipated to occur to each airplane during its total life but may occur a few times when considering the total operational life of all airplanes of this type. Extremely improbable failure condition: For commuter category airplanes, those failure conditions are so unlikely that they are not anticipated to occur during the entire operational life of all airplanes of one type. For other classes of airplanes, the likelihood of occurrence may be greater. Failure condition: A condition having an effect on either the airplane or its occupants, or both, either direct or consequential, which is caused or contributed to by one or more failures or errors considering flight phase and relevant adverse operational or environmental conditions or external events. Failure conditions may be classified according to their severity as follows: No Safety Effect: Failure conditions that would have no effect on safety (that is, failure conditions that would not affect the operational capability of the airplane or increase crew workload). Minor: Failure conditions that would not significantly reduce airplane safety and involve crew actions that are within their capabilities. Minor failure conditions may include a slight reduction in safety margins or functional capabilities, a slight increase in crew workload (such as routine flight plan changes), or some physical discomfort to passengers or cabin crew. Major: Failure conditions that would reduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions to the extent that there would be a significant reduction in safety margins or functional capabilities. In addition, the failure condition has a significant increase in crew workload or in conditions impairing crew efficiency or discomfort to the flight crew or physical distress to passengers or cabin crew, possibly including injuries. Hazardous: Failure conditions that would reduce the capability of the airplane or the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions to the extent that there would be any of the following: a. A large reduction in safety margins or functional capabilities; b. Physical distress or higher workload such that the flight crew cannot be relied upon to perform their tasks accurately or completely or c. Serious or fatal injury to an occupant other than the flight crew. Catastrophic: Failure conditions that are expected to result in multiple fatalities of the occupants or incapacitation or fatal injury to a flight crew member normally with the loss of the airplane. Functional Hazard Assessment: A systematic, comprehensive examination of functions to identify and classify Failure Conditions of those functions according to their severity Hazard: A condition resulting from failures, external events, errors, or combinations thereof where safety is affected. Reliability: The probability that a system or item will perform a required function under specified conditions, without failure, for a specified period of time. Simple System: A system that can be fully assured (validated and verified) by a combination of testing and analysis relative to their requirements and identified Failure Conditions. System: A combination of interrelated items arranged to perform a specific function(s). A common misconception is that the safety assessment goal is to eradicate the potential for hazards; while lofty, such is impossible with complex asynchronous avionics systems. Instead, potential hazards must be effectively uncovered and quantified via the following philosophy: A severe hazard may be tolerable if the probability of its occurrence is acceptably low; A probable hazard may be tolerable if the effect of the hazard on the aircraft, flight crew, and occupants is acceptable; The probability of the occurrence of a hazard must be inversely proportional to its severity. Although mitigation of failures is performed by setting safety qualitative and/or quantitative requirements as defined in above table, errors are mitigated by implementation of a Development Assurance Process (From Development (or Design) Assurance Level A to E). Systematic failure integrity is achieved by means of Development Assurance Process. The typical safety process ‘steps’ for compliance to ARP4761A (and ARP4754A) related to these topics are: Identification of aircraft level and system level failure conditions Identification and/or selection of aircraft-level or system-level mitigation strategies or operational limitations/restrictions Development of safety requirements to capture the failure condition mitigation strategies Allocation of the mitigation strategy safety requirements to the aircraft and/or systems Each of these ‘steps’ are further described below; please note we would like to again recommend that Honda keep internal documentation evolution histories, with review records, for all of these so that downstream when federal aviation administration audits we can show actual compliance all along with primary 4754A/4761 guidance. Identification of Aircraft Level and System Level Failure Conditions An aircraft-level functional hazard assessment and system-level functional hazard assessment (s) should be developed. At a minimum, these Functional Hazard Assessments should identify loss of function failure conditions as well as malfunction failure conditions. Loss of function failure conditions are sometimes referred to as availability failure conditions. Malfunction failure conditions are sometimes referred to as integrity failure conditions. The following helpful notes on Availability and Integrity are from ARP4754A, which is ARP4761’s corollary document covered in the next chapter but summarized below: ARP4754A defines availability as: Qualitative or quantitative attributes are when a system or item is in a functioning state at a given point in time. It is sometimes expressed in terms of the probability of the system (item) not providing its output(s) (i.e., unavailability). [AFuzion Note: ‘Unavailability’ is equivalent to loss of function.] ARP4754A defines integrity as: The qualitative or quantitative attributes of a system or an item indicate that it can be relied upon to work correctly. It is sometimes expressed in terms of the probability of not meeting the work-correct criteria. [A Fuzion Note: ‘Not meeting the work correctly criteria’ is equivalent to malfunction.] Certain types of systems involve other types of failure condition classifications beyond availability and integrity. As an example, Functional Hazard Assessment, which is related to the required navigation performance (RNP) function, usually identifies failure conditions related to continuity. Continuity is defined as: The ability of the total system to perform its function without interruption during the intended operation. The safety concern with degraded continuity is that the system will be interrupted and not provide guidance information for the intended flight phase. The aircraft-level Functional Hazard Assessment should identify all the foreseeable loss of function (availability) and malfunction (integrity) failure conditions. System-level functional hazard assessment should identify all the foreseeable availability and integrity failure conditions of the particular system under assessment. In the event that a system-level Functional Hazard Assessment identifies any availability or integrity failure condition not already identified by the aircraft-level Functional Hazard Assessment, such failure conditions should be flowed up to the aircraft-level Functional Hazard Assessment to ensure completeness of the aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment. A System Functional Hazard Assessment is related to the Aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment through the allocation of aircraft functions to system functions. Aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment failure conditions have a parent-child relationship to System Functional Hazard Assessment failure conditions. This would address the top-down traceability. Identification and/or Selection of Aircraft Level or System Level Mitigation Strategies Oftentimes, mitigation strategies are necessary to incorporate into aircraft and/or system designs so as to reduce the probability of occurrence of certain failure conditions to an acceptable level. A partial list of mitigation strategies is shown below: Development process rigor in accordance with the assigned Function Development Assurance Level or Item Development Assurance Level Flight crew annunciation of loss of function or malfunction Fault detection/isolation/exclusion Fault response Backup functionality Redundancy Use of high reliability (i.e., low failure rate) components Independence Partitioning/protection Dissimilarity/diversity between components Physical separation between components Electrical isolation between components Monitors (e.g., range, rate, persistence) Limiters Comparators Safety interlocks Exception handlers CRC/checksums Error checking and correcting Watchdog timers Built-in-test (power up, continuous, initiated) Functional Hazard Assessments and Preliminary Safety Assessments typically identify mitigation strategies where they are necessary. Development of Safety Requirements to Capture the Failure Condition Mitigation Strategies Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessments (PASA) and Preliminary System Safety Assessments (PSSA) are typically used to capture safety requirements. As part of the Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessments and Preliminary System Safety Assessments development, safety requirements are defined to ensure the implementation of failure condition mitigation strategies. All the safety requirements, including those related to the mitigation strategies, flow into the overall suite of requirements. Allocation of the Mitigation Strategy Safety Requirements to the Aircraft and/or Systems The next step in the aircraft & systems development process is to allocate the requirements (including those safety requirements related to mitigation strategies) to the aircraft, systems, or items. Requirements can also be allocated to various other ‘elements’ such as Manufacturing requirements, Maintenance requirements, Calibration requirements, Operational limitations or restrictions, Flight crew training Requirements should only be allocated to an ‘element’ where it is feasible to implement that requirement. In the event that a requirement is allocated to an element that cannot feasibly implement the allocated requirement, a problem report (or similar mechanism) should be recorded to resolve the issue. There can be a variety of ways to resolve a requirements allocation issue, such as: Identification of the appropriate allocation element (e.g., reallocating a system-level requirement to an aircraft-level requirement) Modification of the allocated requirement to one that can be satisfied by the element that is assigned the requirement Modification of the system architecture such that the allocated requirement can be satisfied Intrinsic Failure Conditions (Hazards) In addition to functional failure conditions, an aircraft or its equipment may contain intrinsic (physical) hazards. Aircraft intrinsic hazards are identified in a Zonal Safety Analysis (ZSA) by examining possible interference between systems in a shared aircraft zone. Equipment intrinsic hazards are identified by evaluating the bill of materials (BOM) of an assembly for properties such as hazardous materials, thermal runaways, high voltage, radiation, chemical toxicity, and explosiveness. The following figure shows the interactions between safety assessment process activities and development process activities. The safety assessment process begins with the concept development phase and ends with the verification that the design meets the safety requirements. Because of the iterative nature of the design process, changes are made, and the modified design should be reassessed for safety. The “iterative approach” within ARP4754 was expanded in ARP4754A (in conjunction with ARP4761) to ensure that developers apply a formal iteration process to safety whereby safety is continually addressed with refined safety assessments throughout the project The sequence of the above safety activities is depicted in the following figure; note that this figure begins in the bottom right corner and works its way upward and to the left: The safety assessment should answer the following questions for the aircraft, then each system, What does it do? What can go wrong? What happens if it goes wrong? What can cause it to go wrong? What is the risk? Can you accept the risk? A key thing to remember is that the safety assessment process begins with an overall Functional Hazard Assessment, followed by a Preliminary Assessment; both of these are top-down. Then, during and after implementation, the final System Safety Assessment is performed inclusive of Failure Mode & Effects Analysis which is bottom-up. The functional hazard assessments (FHAs) are carried out at both the aircraft and system levels. The objective of the Functional Hazard Assessment is to identify failure conditions of aircraft and system functions (loss of function, malfunction, etc.) and their classification (catastrophic, hazardous, major, etc.) so that aircraft and system designs may be proposed and achieved which decrease the probability of the occurrence of the failure conditions to acceptably lesser levels. In avionics certifications, all parties recognize the importance of the Functional Hazard Assessment. The applicant is responsible for identifying each failure condition and choosing the methods for safety assessment. The applicant should then obtain early concurrence from the cognizant certificating authority on the identification of failure conditions, their classifications, and the choice of an acceptable means of compliance. The purpose then of the Functional Hazard Assessment is summarized as identifying all functions of the aircraft system, identifying and describing all failure conditions, determining the effects of each failure condition, classifying each failure condition ( catastrophic, major, minor, etc.), assigning requirements to handle each failure condition, identify supporting material to justify strategies, identify verification techniques for each requirement, identify functional Development (or Design) Assurance Level. Functional hazard assessment (FHA): 1. Before an applicant proceeds with a detailed safety assessment, a Functional Hazard Assessment of the airplane and system functions should be prepared to determine the need for and the scope of subsequent analysis. This assessment may be conducted using service experience, engineering and operational judgment, or service experience and a top-down deductive qualitative examination of each function. A Functional Hazard Assessment is a systematic, comprehensive examination of airplane and system functions to identify potential no safety effect, minor, major, hazardous, and catastrophic failure conditions that may arise, not only as a result of malfunctions or failure to function but also as a result of normal responses to unusual or abnormal external factors. The Functional Hazard Assessment concerns the operational vulnerabilities of systems rather than a detailed analysis of the actual implementation. 2. Each system function should be examined regarding the other functions performed by the system because the loss or malfunction of all functions performed by the system may result in a more severe failure condition than the loss of a single function. In addition, each system function should be examined in terms of functions performed by other airplane systems because the loss or malfunction of different but related functions provided by separate systems may affect the severity of failure conditions postulated for a particular system. 3. The Functional Hazard Assessment is an engineering tool that should be performed early in the design and updated as necessary. It is used to define the high-level airplane or system safety objectives that should be considered in the proposed system architectures. Also, it should be used to assist in determining the DALs for the systems. Many systems may need only a simple review of the system design by the applicant to determine the hazard classification. A Functional Hazard Assessment requires experienced engineering judgment and early coordination between the applicant and the certification authority. The Functional Hazard Assessment is much more than a lengthy derivation; the Functional Hazard Assessment also includes aircraft and system-level requirements that allow the objectives for failure probability to be achieved, including: Design constraints Redundancy considerations Specification & annunciation of failure conditions Proposed pilot and crew mitigation action Recommended maintenance activity Functional Hazard Assessment output data includes: Function list A Functional Hazard Assessment worksheet (table) showing the following: function identification failure conditions phase of flight effect of the failure condition on the aircraft, flight crew, and occupants classification of the failure condition verification method that the probability requirement is met reference to supporting material Derived requirements for lower-level systems Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment (PASA) - New Assessment in 4761A A preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment is a systematic examination of a proposed aircraft architecture to determine how failures could cause the Failure Conditions identified by the Aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment. The Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment process begins during the initial aircraft architecture development phase. Therefore, early identification of aircraft-level safety requirements like function development assurance level, independence, probabilistic budgets, etc., helps to reduce risks during the system development process. The Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment is particularly important for evaluating aircraft-level failure conditions when multiple systems are involved in performing an aircraft function. Preliminary System Safety Assessment (PSSA) The Preliminary System Safety Assessment is a set of analyses normally performed during the system requirements and item requirements phases of the aircraft life cycle. The Preliminary System Safety Assessments are where the proposed system architectures are evaluated and defined; this provides the ability to derive system and item safety requirements. The input documents to the Preliminary System Safety Assessments are the aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment, preliminary aircraft Fault Tree Analysis, and the system Functional Hazard Assessment. The documents produced during the Preliminary System Safety Assessments are the updated aircraft and system Functional Hazard Assessment, updated aircraft and systems Fault Tree Analysis, and the preliminary system Common Cause Analyses (CCAs). The Preliminary System Safety Assessments identifies derived system safety requirements like redundancy, partitioning, monitoring, dissimilarity, etc. The Preliminary System Safety Assessments also identifies the necessary Development Assurance Levels for the system functions and items. The Preliminary System Safety Assessments is a continuous and iterative process conducted at multiple stages of system development. The objective of the Preliminary System Safety Assessments is to determine how the aircraft and system failures can lead to the hazards identified in the Functional Hazard Assessment and to determine how the Functional Hazard Assessment requirements can be met. System Safety Assessment (SSA) The System Safety Assessment verifies that the implemented aircraft and system designs meet the requirements of the aircraft/system Functional Hazard Assessment and the Preliminary System Safety Assessments. The System Safety Assessment documentation generated during the System Safety Assessment includes: List of failure conditions from the system Functional Hazard Assessment and safety requirements allocated to the System Safety Assessment with Fault Tree Analysis Results of the qualitative assessments of each failure condition or safety requirement Any material used to validate the failure condition classifications Any material shows that assumptions used in the assessment to be valid like flight manual procedures, not-to-exceed intervals, etc. Documentation showing item installation requirements If necessary, revised maintenance manuals detailing new maintenance tasks aimed at reducing component exposure times If necessary, revised flight crew operating manuals detailing procedures to be followed in the event of certain failure conditions Information showing that the system and items were developed in accordance with assigned development assurance levels. The methods applied for the safety assessment are depicted in the following: Failure Mode and Effect Analysis, Common Mode Analysis, Particular Risk Analysis, and Zonal Safety Analysis. The most common techniques applied to improve the aircraft and system safety via design enhancements directly supporting improved safety/reliability are depicted in the following : Architectural Mitigation Techniques Methods, Redundancy, Partitioning, Isolation, Separation, Dissimilarity, Monitoring, Protection, Reconfiguration, Mechanisms. Aircraft Safety Assessment (ASA) - New Assessment in 4761A An Aircraft Safety Assessment is a systematic, comprehensive evaluation of the implemented aircraft to verify that the implemented aircraft design meets the safety requirements as defined in the Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment. The Aircraft Safety Assessment determines that the requirements from the Aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment and Preliminary Aircraft Safety Assessment have been met. The Aircraft Safety Assessment also demonstrates that aircraft architecture and the relationships between aircraft functions and systems are acceptable. An Aircraft Safety Assessment is a kind of final assessment that covers results and evidence of safety assessments performed during the development process. The Aircraft Safety Assessment basically covers; The list of Aircraft Functional Hazard Assessment Failure Conditions with the evidence that they are satisfied Evidence that Safety Program Plan objectives have been achieved Evidence that aircraft architecture meets the qualitative and quantitative safety requirements Evidence that aircraft architecture meets the Development Assurance Level allocation requirements The status of open problem reports and their consequences on the aircraft Fault Tree Analysis Fault tree analysis (FTA) is a top-down analysis technique that determines what single failures or combinations of failures exist at the lower levels that might cause each failure condition. The primary purpose of a fault tree analysis is to determine the probability of occurrence of the top event, demonstrating compliance with a probability requirement specified in a higher-level document (usually a functional hazard assessment). Also, the Fault Tree Analysis meets additional objectives: Fault Tree Analysis allows the evaluation of the proposed system architecture, enabling the assignment of reliability budgets to systems and items Fault Tree Analysis identifies the need for design modification: Added reliability of components redundancy, Additional redundancy Additional monitoring Increased maintenance activity The Fault Tree Analysis Basic Events may get their failure rates from the Failure Mode & Effects Analysis. Failure Modes and Effects Analysis Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a systematic, bottom-up analysis performed to identify the failure modes of a system, item, or function and determining the effect of the failure on the next higher level. Failure Mode & Effects Analysis’s can be done at the component, function, or line replaceable units level. Generally, an Failure Mode & Effects Analysis deals with the individual and the combined effects of single failures. As a minimum, a Failure Mode & Effects Analysis should include the following: Identification of the component or function Failure mode(s) of the component or function Failure rate for each failure mode Severity of failure effects Failure effect at the next higher level Means of detecting the failure Compensating actions (i.e., automatic or manual) Safety Aspects of Software Unlike hardware (where you can quantify the safety of an item by calculating its probability of failure over a specified period of time), software safety cannot be numerically measured. So, rather than specifying probabilities of failure associated with software according to the severity of the failure condition -- the intensity of the software documentation and verification is established according to the severity of the failure condition associated with the failure of the software to perform its intended function. Software failure condition categories are similar to the hardware failure condition categories described earlier in this white paper. The following table is from ED-12 (same as DO-178): Failure Condition Category Description Software Development Assurance Level Catastrophic Failure conditions that would prevent continued safe flight and landing A Hazardous/ Severe Major Failure Conditions that would reduce the capability of the aircraft or the ability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions to the extent that there would be a large reduction in safety margins or functional capabilities, physical distress, or higher workload such that the flight crew could not be relied upon to perform their tasks accurately or completely, or 3. adverse effects on occupants, including serious injury or potentially fatal injuries to a small number of occupants.B Major Failure conditions that would reduce the capability of the aircraft or the capability of the crew to cope with adverse operating conditions to the extent that there would be, for example, 1. a significant reduction in safety margins or functional capabilities, 2. a significant increase in crew workload or in conditions impairing crew efficiency, or 3. discomfort to occupants, possibly C Minor failure conditions would not significantly reduce aircraft safety and would involve crew actions that are well within their capabilities. For example, 1. A slight reduction in safety margins or functional capabilities 2. A slight increase in crew workload, such as routine flight plan changes, or 3. Some inconvenience to occupants.D Common Cause Analysis The acceptance of adequate probability of failure conditions is often derived from the assessment of multiple systems based on the assumption that failures are independent. This independence might not exist in the practical sense, and specific studies are necessary to ensure that independence can either be assured or deemed acceptable. The common cause analysis is concerned with events that could lead to a hazardous or catastrophic failure condition. The common cause analysis is divided into three areas of study: Zonal Safety Analysis (ZSA) -- The objective of this analysis is to ensure that the system and equipment installations within each zone of the aircraft are at an adequate safety standard regarding design and installation, interference between systems, and maintenance errors. Particular Risks Analysis (PRA) -- Particular risks are those events or influences outside the systems of interest (for example, fire, leaking fluids, bird strike, HIRF, lightning, etc.). Each risk should be the subject of a specific study to examine and document the simultaneous or cascading effects (or influences) that might violate independence. The objective of the probabilistic risk assessment is to ensure that the safety-related effects are either eliminated or that the risk is acceptable. Common Mode Analysis (CMA) -- The common mode analysis is performed to confirm the assumed independence of the events that were considered in combination for a given failure condition. Another way of saying this is that the common mode analysis is performed to verify that combinatorial events in the Fault Tree Analysis are truly independent in the actual implementation. The effects of development, manufacturing, installation, maintenance and crew errors, and failures of system components that defeat the independence should be analyzed. ARP Certification Software & Platforms As we all know, the certification process is complex and time-consuming. However, there are strategies and tools you can apply that will improve the certification process, reducing the resource commitment, time for certification, and, as a result, the cost of certification. Ultimately, though, these tools can also help improve the safety of your aircraft because less time and resources are committed to performing tasks that can be automated. This can leave more time for engineers to spend on the design and safety of the aircraft. One of the tools often utilized in safety-critical projects is a Model-based tool that creates a Digital Risk Twins (DRT). Known as MADe (Maintenance Aware Design Environment), the MADe platform has added benefits to certification, which continuing airworthines management exposition from our analysis. These can be broken into short-term and long-term benefits. Short-term benefits of such tools: auto-generation of certification documentation, standardized taxonomy, safety verification Preliminary System Safety Assessments or System Safety Assessments, assisting in the population of Functional Hazard Assessment and Simulation-based analyses. Longer-term benefits of such tools: Knowledge capture mechanism that ensures project knowledge is retained within the organization, re-use of retained knowledge assets on other projects, ability to adapt design and re-publish required certification documentation easily, and ability to close the gap for model-based system design. Final Words on Aircraft/Avionics Safety The safety assessment process has fundamental importance in establishing appropriate safety objectives for the aircraft and systems. The level of safety assessment activities is dependent on the aircraft level failure condition classification and the complexity of the system integration and implementation. Therefore, the safety assessment process should be planned early in the development process and managed through this process. During the Preliminary System Safety Assessment process while assessing the system architecture, if the Fault Tree Analysis shows that the system does not meet the safety requirements (i.e., the calculated probability of the undesired top event is greater than the allowed probability), there are several key upgrades that the system manufacturer can do to improve the situation: Use components that have lower failure rates Improve Built-In-Test to detect a higher percentage of failures Increase the degree of redundancy in the system Which of the above is best? The answer depends upon cost, availability, and ease of implementation; a trade-off analysis is required to determine the best alternative for your system. You’ve now initiated the aircraft and avionics systems safety assessments using ARP4761A, and you’re ready to start developing the aircraft and avionics systems themselves. Welcome to ARP4754A (time to turn the page…).