Title: The Aviation Development Ecosystem – Applying DO-178C, ARP4754A, DO-254, & Related Guidelines – Chapter(s) 1 - 2 Author(s): Vance Hilderman, with 25+ Industry Experts Category: Aircraft, Safety, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification Introduction “ It was a dark and stormy night ...” Wait. This book is about making sense of the aviation development landscape and the myriad associated “standards.” What is the pre-aviation cliché “dark and stormy night” from 1830 doing as the opening sentence here? Simple: If you have had pilot training like myself, then you know that dark and stormy nights are rarely your friend. The same is true for developers of critical aviation and avionics systems: working in a dark cockpit and unexpected rainy-day scenarios is never your friend. But in aviation, as in life, we can choose our good friends but never escape exposure to potentially bad influences. The difference between a good outcome and a bad outcome is based on our choices. But making good choices requires great knowledge. And experience. In aviation, there is no substitute for experience: you need it, and until you have it, you are, at best, a “co-pilot.” Fortunately, pilots and aviation developers alike have access to “friends,” which lessen the impact of dark storms. What friends? Aircraft have increasingly advanced airborne avionics and ground-based systems, and that equipment is developed utilizing the guidance explained in this book. Combined, the darkness is illuminated, and the storms are tamed. Easy, right? Not at all: friends need to be close at hand to be helpful, and you need to know how to work with them. However, one challenge remains even when you have good development friends. It’s a “challenge,” not a “problem,” because challenges are problems with solutions. Quick, what’s the solution? Ahhh, we’re getting ahead of ourselves. In these days of advancing digital access and dexterity, the tendency to try for quick solutions without fully understanding the problem ecosystem permeates daily life. First, what is the challenge? Well, that is not a simple question either because there are multiple challenges within the dark and stormy night of aviation systems development, including the fact that every aviation system is different from every other system. The Guidelines are just that: generic guidance lacking easy-to-understand objectives, clarity, or methodology. There is no “one size fits all” optimal approach. There is no external recipe for success, so failures of quality, cost, and schedule are common. Given this non-trivial aviation landscape with multiple challenges, we need to find our friends quickly. We need to make sense of myriad aviation guidelines, standards, memorandums, and policies. Every aviation engineer must readily understand how the aviation development ecosystem applies to their unique situation: the aviation systems, aircraft, hardware, and software they are developing. It’s a good bet that most readers of this book have had advanced mathematics courses where similar confusion existed during early coursework. Remember those days? Students didn’t want to raise their hands and ask a question because it seemed all the other students understood; each thought they were the only ones having difficulty. Now, one realizes those other students were just like them: they had the same textbooks, and they, too, were still in the dark. As an avionics and aviation professional with thirty-five years' experience consulting on 500+aviation projects in 30 countries, I personally assure you everyone has challenges; most of them think they have problems, and very few problems have perfect solutions. It may be the reader is smarter than their peers (after all, they acquired this book), but they still have challenges. They are also smart enough to know there is no single Rosetta Stone with which one can decipher the code to develop projects with minimum cost/schedule and still obtain maximum quality and safety. There are no free lunches, not even in government or corporate free lunch programs: someone paid. But almost everyone has competitors, and those competitors have the same challenges, perhaps even“problems.” With this book, I hope to harness the knowledge of almost four decades of experience and, in the process, convey a useful portion of the knowledge passed along, as I personally trained over 25,000 aviation engineers and 500+ employees on how to achieve engineering and certification success. This book is about providing knowledge so you can become a better co-pilot and ultimately a good pilot of your aviation success… possibly even Great. What makes a technical book “good”? That is an impossibly difficult question because the answer is within the eyes of the beholder. It is certain that every reader of this book has different needs, different questions, and differences in the ways they learn. Indeed, it’s impossible for all things to be all things to all people. But if 80% of the readers find that 80% of the knowledge garnered herein is 80% helpful to them, then I’d say the result was simply as good as it gets. Clearly, it would be easy to simply rehash the published guidelines, e.g., DO-178C, DO-278A, ARP-4754A, etc. Or, rehash DO-248C, which is supposed to explain DO-178C. But you’ve probably already perused those documents and found them lacking. Why? They’re general-purpose guidelines whose purpose is codifying guidelines for aviation and avionics system development. What’s missing is layman's explanations and integration of an overall aviation ecosystem relevant throughout the engineering lifecycle, provided within the context and best practices of our real world. That ecosystem includes the relationship and transition from aircraft and system safety to software/hardware safety. Not theoretical classroom musings but real-world understanding because that is your world: the real world. Let’s take off on a successful learning journey by starting our engines ... Aviation & Avionics: Development and Certification Framework Aviation development is important to people for whom aviation development is important. Who are those persons? Developers, manufacturers, integrators, flight crew, airline operators, and simple enthusiasts wholeheartedly agree on the importance of aviation. Who should pay attention to this book? Simple: everyone is involved in the aviation development ecosystem. Passengers will also agree once they realize their safety is in the offing. Hundreds of years ago, before the concept of Da Vinci’s flying machine sowed the seeds of subsequent balloons, gliders, and airplanes, humans were, by necessity, jacks of all trades. The average earthling required working knowledge of weather, farming, animal husbandry, building, and childbirth. Over time, mankind developed specialization as pragmatic expediency: productivity improved when individuals could concentrate on their individual skills. Guilds, trade unions, governments, and regulations evolved, which, for better and for worse, improved the average person’s quality of life. One outcome of the evolution toward specialization was the decoupling of usage from design knowledge. No longer did the farm implement user need to know how to design a particular farming tool; he placed some trust in the maker based on their relationship and the price paid. Thus were sown the seeds of the modern ethos … and then continuing airworthines management exposition modern airplanes. Aircraft and flying objects in general (balloons, missiles, and unmanned aerial systems) represent hazards above (no pun intended) and beyond that of farming implements: a broken farming tool simply slows down farming until the tool is fixed. A broken aircraft can have greater repercussions: the slowing of life can be permanent. As a result, governments and developers continuing airworthines management exposition together to codify safe foundations for the development and certification of aviation components and systems. The players were almost always well-intentioned but faced challenging trade-offs: over-regulation and both competitiveness and innovation would be sacrificed, resulting in decreased safety. Under-regulation and safety would be compromised, potentially disastrous results. A quandary: what to do? Everyone wants safety for no other reason than selfishness: everyone flies or has the potential to be struck by falling aircraft. However, the aviation industry is one of the most pragmatic and least selfish entities around (at least, in this author’s opinion, as compared to banks, governments, lawyers, and politicians). For the aviation industry, safety is good for health AND for business. There is nothing like a bad aircraft accident to dampen flying enthusiasm and business prospects (think Concorde: one of the safest (and most beautiful) aircraft until the first ever crash in 2000 grounded the fleet permanently). Fortunately, many smart and savvy people have spent decades defining a protocol for aviation safety. Whereas worldwide protocols exist for other manmade endeavors, including peacekeeping (United Nations) and banking (World Bank and IMF), most would agree that aviation safety organizations are the most effective, regardless of cost. The aviation safety framework is generally well-funded and science-based, with a modest amount of politics, and within Western countries, at least, it has reasonable cooperation and support for the aviation industry. This is not to say all is perfect; not at all. There are notable instances of politicking and nationalism, as well as some powerful concerns leveraging that power for their principal benefit. Areas of contention in aviation include CO2 emissions, pilot work rules, noise abatement, over-flight fees, increasing congestion, airline ownership rules, and transatlantic regulation harmonization. The rise of Asia, both as an economic force and an aviation participant, is mandating additional coordination to resolve related challenges. However, overall, the aviation safety framework is workably intact. So, what is that framework? The following figure depicts aviation’s safety layers: Airspace deals with flight planning, sector and national boundaries, and control of numerous aircraft/operations simultaneously.CNS / ATM (Communication, Navigation, Surveillance / Air Traffic Management) deals with ground and satellite-based activities relevant to aircraft and flying safety, while aircraft deals with the safety aspects of a single aircraft. Avionic System pertains to safety aspects of an avionics system where an aircraft is comprised of many such avionic systems. As the above diagram depicts, “safety” is about the entire aviation ecosystem, not merely certain aspects. Avionics developers often like to think of themselves as being on the top of the food chain. However, as the above diagram clearly depicts, avionics systems are at the bottom. Why? It’s about the aviation ecosystem, which is simply bigger than any one system or even aircraft. Clearly, some aspects of the aviation safety ecosystem have a greater contribution to safety than others. But if you were to ask an aviation safety expert, “Which aspect of aviation safety is the most important?” the answer should be “All of them.” In other words, while certain aspects can have a greater influence on safety or require more rigor, all aspects within the aviation safety ecosystem are important. But wait, that’s not the way modern human brains operate in today’s world; everything must be ranked. Think about that; have you ever caught yourself thinking about your weight, height, fitness level, hours of sleep, golf score, bank balance, calories, social media connections, or salary? Congratulations, you’re normal. However, aviation safety is about an ecosystem that defies simple ranking because each aspect contributes to safety and is thus individually important. Another way to look at aviation safety is to consider a simple chain. Aviation safety resembles this chain because each link contributes to the function and reliability of the chain. Want to find the chain’s weakest link? Easy: simply increase tension by pulling on each end until the chain breaks. Where does it break? At its weakest link. So if a chain had one hundred links, like a modern aircraft can contain over one hundred avionics systems, the chain is only as strong as its weakest link. There is no safety benefit to having ninety-nine links of the chain extra strong, with one link being weaker than necessary. Aviation safety is about defining the “strength” or reliability of each aspect of the aviation ecosystem, with the realization that overall safety is about many different aspects and their interrelationships. Aviation safety cannot be assessed by simply stressing the system until it crashes: aviation safety is about avoiding, not causing, crashes. Therefore, aviation safety must be based upon a scientific approach that uses many techniques, including analysis, engineering, process, and standards. Airspace, communications, aircraft, systems, and components are all important, but each represents a different view that must be considered within the safety evaluation process. With each of those views, there are numerous criteria that contribute to safety; each criterion is important, though the individual contribution to safety can differ. (This leads to a discussion of Development Assurance Levels (DALs), commonly referred to as criticality levels, which will be dealt with most thoroughly in the ARP4761/A Safety section herein.) The overall aviation certification framework is depicted in the following figure. As shown in the above figure, aviation certification starts in the upper left with an ARP4761/A-based safety assessment regime. The aircraft and avionics systems architectures are defined along with safety requirements, which are fed into the ARP4754A-based aircraft and system development and certification process. Then, underlying avionics system aspects are dealt with via the various “DO-XXX” guidelines, where “DO” simply means North American Document. Europe has a similar ecosystem, but the above documents are instead designated “ED-XXX,” where “ED” means “European Document.” The remainder of this book is devoted to technical introductions and dissection of each of the above documents to explain their role within the aviation development and certification ecosystem. Designing and certifying aviation systems has some resemblance to designing and building the links of a chain: the builder must know the purpose of the chain and how strong it is expected to be. Without that knowledge, the builder will make the link either too strong, which wastes resources, or too weak, which causes that link to break prematurely. Either outcome is considered a failure. In avionics, the layman might think it normal to simply build it to be as close as possible to perfection with the highest possible reliability. There is no such thing as “perfection” within the realm of complex systems. Without a defined minimum level of operational reliability and integrity, there would be no way to determine if the system is “good enough.” Reliability without safeguards does not fully address product assurance, such as how failures occur and the system-level effect of such a failure. If a chain fails, what is the impact on the operational system? Reliability itself simply gives a failure rate: how it fails, with grace or not, becomes an issue. A link in the chain may fail, but how it fails and the impact of that failure are what cause a bad day from a safety perspective. Thus, there needs to be a dimension of integrity as we cannot simply “rely” upon reliability. Every widget designed and built is imperfect to a degree. when that combination of imperfections aligns in a “Murphy way” is what safety is supposed to identify. Therefore, avionics development becomes a study in the Avionics Development Ecosystem, e.g., this book. In a truly free marketplace without safety-based regulations, cost and quality would continually be decreased until the link in the aviation safety chain broke, with disastrous results. Instead, avionics systems are analyzed to provide insight into the result of failures in aircraft and human safety. Then, the relationship of that system’s correct operation to overall safety is determined, and a minimum threshold level for reliability is assigned: engineering techniques are employed to ensure the necessary rigor is applied based upon that minimum reliability and integrity level. A note on aviation development/certification cost versus safety: Avionics development is not cheap; it’s almost always more expensive to develop products with provable quality attributes than those without. A common worldwide misconception implies that avionics development is expensive because of the over-burdensome development process and certification considerations. There is no doubt that rigorous development and certification requirements increase initial costs; it’s impossible to be otherwise. However, that common refrain overlooks the two key questions associated with avionics development costs: 1. Given the importance of safety within aviation, are the cost increases associated with avionics development and certification excessive? 2. Are economies of scale really possible in an industry where successful projects yield hundreds of units sold versus consumer electronics, where success is measured in the millions of units? Clearly, then, these two questions heavily influence the cost-versus-benefit arena, if not changing the game altogether. As with politics and pizza, there will never be total agreement on these two questions. However, everyone agrees with the following: avionics development can never be cheap, but it is possible to be cost-effective. Also, aviation is a market that, perhaps more than any other, places an emphasis on quality over cost: a cheap product with failures, high maintenance, or frequent replacement is neither cheap nor cost-effective. Have you ever bought a cheap tool only to be dissatisfied with its performance and replace it with a more expensive competitor later? That situation is highly relevant in avionics, where product development costs can be in the millions of dollars, and unit production costs can be in the tens of thousands. Aircraft themselves epitomize the very definition of trade-off: cost, fuel consumption, and payload are inextricably woven together. This explains why today there are hundreds of different new aircraft models currently for sale: each type is well suited for a particular need but incurs trade-offs versus other types. Increase payload, and you increase purchase and operating costs. Decrease payload, and you save fuel but can carry less payload, which has an adverse effect on revenue. Each category typically has several competitors, which explains why hundreds of different aircraft models are currently on sale. As with cost, avionics safety has a similar relationship. Additional reliability, or safety, can be added but always at additional cost. For example, developing back-up airborne satellite communication systems as if they were thrust reversers would significantly increase cost with little, if any, increase in overall safety. Again, it is a matter of trade-offs. So aviation safety blends both art and science, and the science includes a cost/benefit analysis of each proposed safety-related aspect. With unlimited time and budget, safety can always be continuously improved. Consider old military aircraft with eight engines. Why eight? Because “surely” eight must be more reliable than six, which is more reliable than four, which is … And how many engines does the world’s most modern fighter aircraft in production today have? The F-35 Joint Strike Fighter has one engine. Exactly. Meanwhile, consider the Fly-By-Wire (FBW) example: conventional cable and pulley systems were replaced by FBW. At what cost were they replaced? Simplex (single channel) electronics and actuators typically won’t meet safety requirements, so architectures need to double, then possibly triple, and sometimes quad to meet safety requirements. This geometrically increases cost, weight, complexity, and, of course, the cost. So, within the entire avionics development ecosystem, pragmatic attention is paid to cost. A Final Word Before Diving In ... At the end of the day, there are no projects with unlimited time and budget. Avionics are called avionics because they must support flight and meet the safety framework that is explained herein. The following material provides the insights necessary to successfully navigate the cost/benefit trade-off route while still achieving sufficient safety.