Title: Commercial Aviation Safety– Chapter 14 Author(s): Stephen K. Cusick; Antonio I. Cortes; Clarence C. Rodrigues Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, Accidents Chapter 14 THE FUTURE OF COMMERCIAL AVIATION SAFETY INTRODUCTION This chapter explores the expected major challenges facing the commercial aviation industry in the first half of the 21st century, as detected through new factors pres­ent in accidents, serious incidents, and proposed by academic researchers. Several of the previously covered areas in the book will continue receiving significant attention by aviation professionals because many risks have not been eliminated and must be continuously managed going into the future. The new concepts exposed in this chapter are not meant to be an exhaustive coverage of emerging safety areas, and as the years pass, new areas of attention will surely emerge. That is the nature of safety. As the Nobel Prize-winning Danish atomic physicist, Niels Bohr, once humorously quipped, "Prediction is very difficult, especially of the future." Nevertheless, the areas covered provide an overview of different conditions that are receiving increased attention by aviation safety professionals at the time of this book's printing. AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT There is a relatively well-known quote, sometimes attributed to the American author Mark Twain that says, "Buy land, they're not making any more." A similar sentiment can apply to airspace since we do not have the ability to make more area in which to fit aircraft. What we can do is use what we have more efficiently. There are increased demands to integrate new types of vehicles into the airspace that has mostly been used by traditional commercial and private aircraft. The significant increases in commercial air travel strain the planet's airspace, especially when coupled with the explosive growth of unmanned aircraft systems (aka "drones"). The airspace will face further strain in future years as new sub­orbital space flight vehicles start ascending and descending through the lower atmosphere in a short amount of time. When we venture away from airports and, particularly, out over large bodies of water that often lack radar coverage, the challenge is not as much traffic congestion as it is tracking flights. When flights go missing it can take years to find the aircraft that have experienced an accident, if we find the missing aircraft at all. AIRSPACE UTILIZATION Much of the globe increasingly faces a daunting aviation safety challenge as the century develops. The seemingly incessant increase in the demand for air transpor­tation will mean that more and more aircraft will fill the skies. Simultaneously, the traveling public is growing more demanding of safety. The overriding challenge is therefore how to simultaneously enhance airspace capacity, particularly in the airport areas, while decreasing the commercial aviation accident rate. Currently, most U.S. airspace is managed by air traffic controllers who use radar as a key tool for managing aircraft flow. The radar sweeps the area it covers with a radio wave and recognizes flying objects. Typically, it takes a radar dish 12 seconds to rotate. Even though it is a reliable method, it is expensive and does not give information in real time since controllers must wait 12 seconds for the position updates. To cope with the time gap for new information, controllers keep wider separation between aircraft. This decreases the capacity of the airspace. The aviation industry and the governments of many countries are looking for new, safer ways to increase the amount of planes in the sky. New operational procedures and technology have been introduced systemati­cally and slowly. Safety is a critical concern of the industry, so the challenge must be approached with caution. Proposed changes undergo serious consideration and testing prior to being implemented. The field is very innovative, but often the tech­nological advancements in the aircraft have outpaced those for air traffic control. In some cases, planes built during the 21 st century are using routes with radar stations from the 1940s and 1950s. For the traffic growth to continue safely, the air traffic management system must also undergo changes. This includes changing the system so that it centers on the performance of flight itself. Controllers would manage the airspace to provide optimal use rather than control the route of each flight. The benefit is that control­lers would be able to handle more aircraft at any one time while reducing delays and improving safety. North America remains the busiest region in the world for air traffic. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is the body that governs how the United States will implement new policies and technologies for increasing the safety of airspace utilization. The federal aviation administration aims to incorporate technologies that will make air transportation more safe and efficient. Some of these include NextGen programs such as satellite surveillance, required navigation performance (RNP), and the Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) system. NextGen is the United States' new national airspace system set to be in place by 2025. It aims to transform the air traffic control system from a radar-based system to a satellite-based one with GPS. The program's priorities include multiple runway operations, nonvoice data communication, performance-based navigation, surface operations, and data sharing. One aspect all of these priorities have in com­mon is that ultimately they will make the ground and the airspace safer places. Satellite surveillance is technology that has recently emerged to help support air traffic navigation. With greater visibility of what is going on in the sky at all times, air traffic controllers can utilize more of the available airspace for opera­tions. Aircraft can also fly closer together, which increases capacity significantly without affecting safety. Further reductions in spacing may be obtained through more accurate modeling and detection of wake turbulence, among other factors. Required navigation performance is a concept that stems from satellite sur­veillance and is helping improve the safety of airspace utilization. It allows planes to fly precise routes without having to rely on ground-based radio-navigational signals. One advantage is that RNP allows pilots to land in hazardous weather conditions that might otherwise require holding, diversion, or even cancellations. Its precision and reliability ultimately can help air traffic controllers to minimize delayed flights and reduce traffic congestion (Figure 14-1 ). Another flexible airspace and flight operations tool that will help improve safety in the skies is ADS-B. It pairs the satellite navigation system with a network of receivers that are on the ground. The result is enhanced oversight of aircraft position in the sky, an advantage over radar, which only locates an aircraft when it sweeps the area within its range. By using ADS-B, air traffic controllers can reduce aircraft sepa­ration, allowing for more efficient routes and increased airspace capacity. UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS (UAS) In addition to expected increases in traditional commercial air traffic, worldwide airspace is under growing pressure by a new type of user. An unmanned aircraft system (UAS), sometimes called a "drone" by the public, is an aircraft without a human pilot onboard-instead, the UAS is controlled by an operator on the ground. The growth of UAS has exploded as users purchase them for commercial and recreational purposes. Other terms used to describe these vehicles include unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) or remotely piloted aircraft (RPA). As they become more common in the sky, UAS are proving to threaten the safety of traditional aircraft operating in the airspace. Chapter 10 contains further information on this airspace threat, and the reader is encouraged to consult the Internet for the latest information in this rapidly changing area (see www.faa.gov/UAS/) . Although there has yet to be a confirmed midair collision between a UAS and a piloted aircraft in the United States, it is just a matter of time until it occurs. Outside of the United States, the French government agency in charge of accident investigation, the Bureau d'Enquetes et d' Analyses, reported that on February 19, 2016 a UAS continuing airworthines management exposition within 16 feet of impacting an Air France A320 carrying 150 people which was arriving in Paris from Barcelona. The pilot had to disconnect the autopilot and take evasive action to prevent the collision. Furthermore, actual colli­sions have already occurred in other countries. Many close calls have been near air­ports. In a number of these cases, the event happened within 5 miles of an airport and at altitudes higher than 400 feet, meaning that UAS obviously can operate far into the airspace that is regularly used by commercial aircraft. Several challenges are presented when trying to prevent such a hazard. Many of the operators of small UAS have no aviation background and are oblivious to the legal requirements for operating in controlled airspace. It proves very chal­lenging even locating the operators, who could be just about anyone in a private residence operating a small UAS out of their backyard. The damage a UAS can cause to an aircraft can be quite significant. Both academia and industry have started to research the impacts a collision between the two types of aircraft may have. Currently, aircraft engine manufacturers test their designs against bird strikes but have not taken UAS into consideration. Recent published studies show that a UAS encounter could cause critical damage, includ­ing breaking the glass of a cockpit, fracturing helicopter blades, and destroying jet engines. UAS come in varying shapes and sizes. Figure 14-2 shows what most of the general public associate with UAS, but Figure 14-3 serves to caution us that some vehicles can actually be imposingly large. To prevent such mishaps and advise the public about UAS safety, the federal aviation administration and industry groups have launched an education campaign titled Know Before You Fly. Since UAS can jeopardize airspace safety in some situations, the federal aviation administration has deemed certain places as no drone zones without prior authorization. These areas include, for example, airport control zones, U.S. military bases, U.S. national parks, and near the White House in Washington, D.C. To learn more about federal aviation administration current UAS regulations, please refer to FAR Part 107 and the federal aviation administration Web site. COMMERCIAL SPACE VEHICLES Space tourism used to be a dream of many. However, every day we get closer and closer to making the dream a reality through the commercial space flight industry. In addition to space tourism, aerospace companies are developing vehicles designed for suborbital spaceflight to perform science missions that study the atmosphere, astronomy, and global climate change. In some cases, the spacecraft are designed to depart from and arrive at commercial airfields in the same way that traditional aircraft use runways. The vehicles may feature rocket-powered climbs up to 350,000 feet that result in extremely high rates of climb through all the levels of the airspace and then descend back minutes later after reaching their peak altitude. With such an opera­tion, though, comes the challenge of safely integrating such unusual air vehicles into the air traffic control system. An increase in space operations combined with continued growth in air traffic operations could place a huge demand on the air­space system and air traffic control. Figure 14-4 depicts the simulator for a subor­bital space flight vehicle, showing a mission specialist in a pressure suit preparing for takeoff to perform a mesospheric imaging science mission. The U.S. space program today includes three sectors: civil, military, and com­mercial. The Office of Commercial Space Transportation (AST) is the division of the federal aviation administration whose mission is to ensure the protection of the public, property, and national security during commercial launch and reentry activities. It also aims to encourage, facilitate, and promote U.S. commercial space transportation. To accommodate the addition of commercial space traffic into the national airspace, the federal aviation administration has developed a concept of operations called Space and Air Traffic Management System (SATMS). It will play a pivotal role in providing safe access to all users of the airspace. This aims to seamlessly integrate space vehicles traveling to and from space by developing new space and air traffic management tools. Together, these tools will provide enhanced communications, navigation, and surveillance (CNS) services. A major goal will be to generate methods and proce­dures to reduce the amount of airspace that is restricted for each launch and the amount of time that space will be needed. In turn, this would accommodate regular air traffic without disrupting the space mission and compromising safety. A part of the SATMS is the decision support tool (DST). The tool is a soft­ware and computing system the federal aviation administration is currently designing to facilitate air traffic controllers' management of airspace restrictions and to reduce risks to aircraft from space operations. The tool would have two modes: planning and real time. In the planning mode, the DST would identify the airspace restriction require­ments, potential impacts on other airspace users, and options alleviating those impacts. The real-time mode would show the space vehicle's route and help air traffic controllers to maintain a safe separation if emergencies occur. Ultimately, the SATMS DST would allow decision makers to make informed choices for reducing collision risks in the airspace. Challenges currently exist that prevent the SATMS DST from being fully inte­grated. One obstacle is validation. Extensive verification testing will be mandatory throughout each phase of design and deployment. Second, the DST must be flexible enough to receive data from many types of vehicles and operators and to provide output information for other parties such as the airlines, military, NASA, and future spaceport and range operators. Each space mission will have a set of unique requirements that will shape the airspace integration process. As a result, it will require its own strategy. Currently, there is a list of airspace management strategies that include the following: • Minimizing the duration of the launch and reentry operation's window • Moving the operating window away from peak traffic times • Altering the launch or reentry trajectory to avoid placing airspace restrictions in congested airspace • Negotiating special use airspace so that reserved airspace can be used during the operation to reduce reroute mileage of affected aircraft One obvious risk of operating traditional aircraft in the same airspace as the comparatively much faster space vehicles is collision. Space vehicles are expected to pass through the vertical layers of airspace quite quickly as they climb to space where payloads can be employed, science samples collected, and tourists awed. Such vehicles could potentially climb through the upper bound of the national airspace system, which is 60,000 feet, in 2 to 3 minutes. Therefore, these operations would be confined to a small region of airspace for a short period of time. One option is the use of space transition corridors (STCs) to safely separate traffic. STCs would be designated airspace areas that would be issued and withdrawn as necessary to maximize safety while minimizing the impact to air traffic. An supplemental type certificate would remain in place shortly prior to the flight and removed once the mission had been com­pleted. During the flight, air traffic control would watch the space for weather and traffic conditions and remain on guard for responding to an accident that could affect the safety of the area. Figure 14-5 shows a potential standard profile for certain types of suborbital space flight vehicles, which may ascend to space and descend for landing at a single operating location all in less than 30 minutes. Although STCs may greatly reduce the risk of a midair collision between space vehicles and conventional aircraft, STCs may prove highly inefficient if spacecraft traffic increases. There are hopes that the commercial spaceflight industry will grow rapidly and also a strong possibility that vehicles will use the same airspace as traditional commercial aircraft. Some plans call for commercial spacecraft to operate out of conventional airfields several times a day per vehicle. If several such vehicles operate with such high frequencies from the same airfield, it is conceivable that there could be dozens of fast climbs and descents through the airspace overly­ing an airfield in a single day. Reserving such airspace exclusively for space vehicles could potentially paralyze commercial aviation traffic in the area, so innovative technology and procedures will have to be developed to integrate the spacecraft with the aircraft. Research is currently underway to determine the feasibility of using newly developed technology onboard suborbital space vehicles to allow their pilots to provide their own separation from traditional commercial aircraft, possi­bly by relying on ADS-B and traffic deconfliction algorithms. Hazards could also arise if commercial spacecraft experience catastrophic inflight breakups that spray underlying areas with falling debris. For example, the Space Shuttle Columbia in 2003 broke apart during reentry, producing a large cloud of falling debris, much of which could have severely damaged or destroyed an aircraft on impact. Models have shown that a piece of a space vehicle debris less than one pound in weight could puncture the wing or cabin of aircraft cruis­ing underneath. Figure 14-6 depicts one of the major pieces of a Virgin Galactic suborbital space vehicle that continuing airworthines management exposition apart in the air and crashed to the ground in California in 2014, killing the copilot and severely injuring the pilot. OcEANIC TRACKING The flying public often observes how unimaginable it is that in the 21st century we still lose commercial aircraft in the middle of a flight during overseas journeys. In fact, it is something that the aviation community has dealt with since the first transoceanic flight. In 2009 Air France Flight 447, an Airbus 330, disappeared over the Atlantic Ocean, and it took considerable time to find parts of the wreck­age. Figure 14-7 shows recovery crews working with a large piece of wreckage in the ocean. The passenger flight was operating from Rio de Janeiro to Paris. All 228 occupants of the aircraft perished. In 2014, Indonesia AirAsia Flight 8501, an Airbus 320, went missing over the Java Sea for a period of time and was found to have crashed, killing all 155 passengers and 7 crew on board. Also in 2014, Malaysia Flight 370, a Boeing 777, disappeared and could not be found to date. All 227 passengers and 12 crew­members were presumed dead. Currently, the aviation community is considering short-term and long-term steps to improve aircraft tracking in non-radar areas. Although many commercial airline passengers probably expect that their flight is being tracked on radar by air traffic control, significant amounts of airspace remain out of radar coverage. In areas such as the North Pole and South Pole, oce­anic airspace, and parts of Africa, Asia, and South America, pilots must use radio or satellite communications to update their location to air traffic control. international civil aviation organization requires that, at minimum, aircraft have a working two-way radio to communicate with air traffic control. As per federal aviation administration recommendations for oceanic and international operations, pilots are to report their position to the appropriate air navigation ser­vice provider for that region before entering a new flight information region. Pilots should report their position after the first 30 minutes of flight and at required intervals thereafter if the route does not have designated reporting points. The oceanic airspace presents surveillance limitations that make it hard to pinpoint the exact location of an aircraft in an emergency. Radar keeps track of aircraft position in real time, but coverage begins to lessen more than 150 miles from the coast and in remote airspaces. Since there is not a constant update of an aircraft's location in those areas without radar coverage, pilots are to report their position. Updating one's position can be problematic. If there are disruptions from weather and atmospheric conditions over the ocean, it may take a flight crew 10 to 20 minutes to relay their position using radio. This could pose a serious situation in the event of an emergency when changes in altitude or course are required in prox­imity to other aircraft. Figure 14-8 illustrates just a small portion of global oceanic traffic through depictions of flight tracks. Another challenge posing a threat to safety in oceanic traffic monitoring is the difficulty of communication and coordination between air traffic control centers. International air traffic control is divided geographically based on flight information regions. This problem was highlighted by the accident of Air France Flight 447. There was a lack of communication between the controllers about the projected passage of the plane from one airspace to another. The disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 in the Indian Ocean is the most recent event that has pulled the international aviation community together to improve aircraft tracking. Professionals would like to see position reporting decreased to 15-minute intervals, with the ability to increase communication in the event of an emergency. Such capabilities should allow the regular and automatic transmission of aircraft position information. Currently, commercial airline operators are responsible for aircraft tracking. The 15-minute frequency is the best compromise between the desire to know an aircraft's precise location and the cost of transmitting data. When an aircraft does disappear, investigators search for data that can show them the last position of the aircraft and what happened. The current, crash­resistant flight and data recorders possess such data but must first be located in order to retrieve the data. The future may bring the requirement for aircraft to transmit certain data to ground stations in real time so that investigators can quickly narrow the area of search for wreckage and also hone in on factors that potentially contributed to the event. However, modern aircraft create a large amount of recordable data and technical solutions are required in order to transmit the data in real time to ground stations. For example, an article in the March 2013 issue of Computerworld UK states that Virgin Atlantic expects to receive half a terabyte of data from each Boeing 787 per flight, whereas only 4 years ago, all the commercial airlines combined gener­ated 1 1 terabytes of data for the entire year. One terabyte equals a trillion bytes of data. The growth in the amount of data available for transmission is increasing at an alarming rate and creating transmission systems that span long distances with the bandwidths to accommodate large amounts of data streaming from tens of thousands of aircraft simultaneously may prove expensive. Transmitting only posi­tion data would reduce the bandwidth requirements and would assist in locating the wreckage if an accident has occurred, but it would prove to be of little value to accident investigators. Another proposal from the community was to change communication stan­dards between air traffic service providers and airlines to improve coordination if there is an emergency. Such changes would create protocols and standards to improve the response to instances of missing position reports or other danger­ous situations. Additionally, aviators have suggested that position reports should always include latitude, longitude, altitude, and time information because having this information allows for more precise positions. Several technologies exist that could help achieve enhanced tracking. One is the Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS), which provides digital datalink for transmission of short messages via air band radio or satellite between ground stations and aircraft. It has the capacity for enhanced reporting if the system is triggered by an unanticipated altitude change or a flight level below a specific altitude. A second viable option is the Future Air Navigation System (FANS), an avionics system that provides a direct data link communication between air traffic controllers and pilots. Information includes clearances, pilot requests, and positioning reports. The airline ground system can access pertinent information about the position of the aircraft using special applications. Despite having technologies that could enhance the safety of oceanic tracking, there are still some obstacles associated with them. One maj or con­cern with aircraft communication addressing and reporting system and FANS is that they are not tamper-proof. Consequently, anyone with knowledge about the technologies could disable both systems and the aircraft's transponder. Without these systems, it is not possible for the air­craft to send position data. Another hurdle is cost. To equip a single aircraft with aircraft communication addressing and reporting system could cost up to $ 1 00,000. Similarly, adding FANS would result in an additional cost of $250,000. These are not small amounts, particularly for opera­tors of large fleets of aircraft where costs rapidly add up to multimillion dollar expenses. Tracking extends beyond just airplanes in flight. Another issue to discuss is the location of plane wreckage if it does crash into the ocean. The wreckage and flight data recorder are essential items to have for the accident investigation. As a result, the safety community is taking measures to make sure that these items can be located whenever there is an accident. Ocean currents can move aircraft wreckage from its initial point of impact. Aviation professionals are looking at extending battery life on underwater locator beacons that are attached to flight recorders. Also, the industry has discussed including a second beacon that has a greater transmission range. International Civil Aviation Organization has developed the G lobal Aeronautical Distress and Safety System (GADSS) to work on the above matters. This system addresses the concern of locating an aircraft's position both during and after the accident sequence. GADSS consists of four key components. First, it aims to improve the aircraft tracking system by increasing position reports when abnor­malities are detected. Second, GADSS wants to incorporate an autonomous distress tracking system that would act independently from the regular aircraft tracking system. Unusual attitude, speed, acceleration, or failure would trigger an alert. Third, there would be an automatic, deployable flight recorder. The flight recorder would separate automatically from the aircraft in the event of an accident. Fourth, there would be an improvement in procedures and management of information. Other future changes include improved coordination and information sharing and enhanced training of emergency teams. SuRFACE To Am MISSILES Terrorists have long understood the importance of air travel in today's society, and as a result, made it one of their prime targets. In 2001 the terrorist organization al-Qaeda declared the incapacitation of the U.S. economy as their primary goal. That same year, the 9-1 1 terrorist attacks used the airline industry as a tool for wreaking both terror and economic mayhem. Fast forward to today, and another very present threat to commercial aviation safety is surface to air missiles (SAMs). Typically used for war, the missiles are launched from ground vehicles or shoulder­mounted units to destroy aircraft or other missiles. The threat itself is not new. In 1970, an Alitalia DC-8 was hit by a SAM near Damascus, Syria. There have been more recent incidents in which commercial planes have been targeted, shot at, and even hit by SAMs. In 2002, an Arkia Israel Boeing 757 flying near Mombasa, Kenya, narrowly averted being hit by two SAMs. In 2014, another commercial airliner was hit by a SAM but £aired much worse. The aircraft was a Boeing 777 operating as Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 (MH 17) . The aircraft was on a scheduled flight from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur. While crossing over the Ukraine-Russian border, militants mistakenly shot down the plane, killing all 283 passengers and 15 crewmembers on board. Figures 14-9 through 14-11 depict the tragic sequence of events that downed the jet. Unfortunately, commercial planes are quite vulnerable to SAMs. Such aircraft have takeoff and landing patterns that are predictable, unlike military aircraft that can vary such patterns to make it harder for terrorists to set up a missile launch to intercept their target. Second, some missiles have heat-seeking or radar-guiding capabilities. Furthermore, some combat aircraft have the ability to launch flares that are designed to confuse the SAM's guidance system by sending out waves of heat over a wide area or have chaff or jammers that confuse radar units. Commercial passenger airplanes have several components that produce signifi­cant heat signatures, large radar signatures, and do not possess flare, chaff, or jam­ming systems, thus making them particularly susceptible to SAMs. However, laser jammers are an emerging technology that could provide substantial protection against missiles. They work by overwhelming the signal produced by the missile and then substitute a special signal transmitted by the laser in an effort to divert the missile. This would allow for the diversion of a single attack. At least one com­mercial airline already uses jammers to mitigate the SAM threat, although such use is by no means widespread. Other viable defensive options exist but they are not best suited for commercial airline use. When such technologies are not used, the best way by which commercial flight crews can avoid getting hit by SAMs is to avoid potentially dangerous areas in the first place. The federal aviation administration publishes information about no fly zones through Notices to Airmen (NOTAMs), which place restrictions on commercial flights operated by U.S. airlines. The geopolitical situation of a region can greatly influence the FAA's decision to add a region to the forbidden list. There are two levels of warning. A Red Zone typically prohibits flight at any level of altitude, while a Yellow Zone denotes areas that pilots should exercise caution when flying over. Figure 14-12 shows areas of risk from SAMs during overflights on long-duration trips out of London. In the aftermath of the MH 17 shoot-down, international civil aviation organization stated that countries have the responsibility to alert others of any potential risks to civil aviation operations in their airspace. However, some leaders argue that countries could jeopardize national security and intelligence gathering activities if they share that informa­tion. Moving forward, governments must work together to create channels to make critical threat information available to international civil aviation authorities. Countering the proliferation of missiles is a top security priority for the United States, among other reasons, because SAMs pose a serious threat to the commercial aviation industry. Policy changes could potentially combat the threat of SAMs. The United States can fight against missiles becoming widely available in the interna­tional weapons marketplace through buyback programs and technology control. Many existing missiles that are in the wrong hands are old and obsolete. While they may be ineffective against modern military aircraft, they can still pose a threat to civilian aircraft. One recommendation that the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has sug­gested to prepare pilots for handling missile threats is to increase pilot training, such as putting pilots through specific simulator exercises using missile attack situations. These scenarios would benefit pilots by preparing them to fly and land a damaged aircraft. A missile strike that does not cause a catastrophic structural failure would likely be survivable if the crew is adequately trained to handle such a situation. In fact, this did happen in Iraq to a DHL cargo flight in 2003. Shortly after the Airbus 300's departure, a SAM struck the plane's left wing, causing a fire and loss of the hydraulic control system. The event occurred near Baghdad and the Airbus 300 managed to land, although severely damaged. Despite the damage, the pilots were still able to land the plane safely. There are measures that can be taken to improve airport security to protect commercial aviation from SAMs. An increase in security, surveillance, and patrols in the areas of airports with commercial aviation will only protect aircraft to an extent. Approach and departure corridors are still within the range of SAMs and stretch for several miles beyond airport property. Security forces would need to determine locations beyond the airport property that have a higher threat potential and where aircraft may be susceptible to attacks. Forces will then be able to patrol areas to counter threats to security. Currently, there is no single solution to ensure security in the sky from SAMs. Rather, a combination of defensive options is needed to guard against this serious threat. AIRCRAFT DESIGN AIRCRAFT IciNG PREVENTION Aircraft de-icing and anti-icing is a critical part of preventing frost, ice, or snow from building up on the wings of the plane. At first glance, it may not seem like this type of precipitation could affect flight, but in fact, it has a critical impact. It has been recognized as a significant safety hazard affecting the aviation industry today. That is why aviators take many safety measures to ensure that planes get cleaned of contaminants and stay clean when frozen precipitation occurs or condi­tions may lead to freezing of moisture on an aircraft. Although the hazard posed by such conditions is not new, the future of com­mercial aviation safety will likely feature ways to enhance the detection of contaminants and improve a stall detection system's accuracy when airfoils are contaminated. Currently, there are no routinely used systems that automatically detect the presence of icing on lifting surfaces, such as aircraft wings and tails, dur­ing flight. Furthermore, current stall warning systems also do not take into account the disrupted airflows that occur during icing and can produce aircraft aerody­namic stalls well in advance of any warning. The contamination of the aerodynamic surfaces on an aircraft can prevent the generation of sufficient lift to sustain flight, can impede the movement of control surfaces, and can make the aircraft uncontrollable. Often the first time a pilot notices that contamination exists is during takeoff, when the aircraft is unable to lift off, or when the aircraft becomes airborne but is unable to climb out of ground effect. When contamination occurs unevenly, the aircraft may still be able to become air­borne, but, as soon as the aircraft exits ground effect, an asymmetrical stall may develop which results in a wing dipping and contacting the runway. The threat of icing occurring during ground operations is particularly worthy of discussion because aircraft equipped with onboard anti-icing and de-icing systems are often severely limited in operating such systems while the aircraft is on the ground. Future efforts to enhance safety with ground icing must stress to pilots that they should always perform a tactile contamination inspection of airfoils prior to flight. Contamination can be extremely hard to detect, particularly at night or dur­ing precipitation when inspections are rushed to get the plane out of the rain, snow, or sleet. Pilots should be taught to remove their glove when performing a tactile contamination inspection of the airfoil since a gloved hand is unable to detect the presence of small amounts of contamination. Such miniscule quantities can cause a significant aerodynamic problem. Yet another challenge is presented by the inacces­sibility of airfoils on the empennage, or rear-most section of an aircraft, particularly for T-tail assemblies. Pilots must often rely on instinct, deduction, or trust in another observer to ensure that aircraft horizontal stabilizers are free of contamination when performing external inspections of aircraft before departure. Most airlines use a glycol-water mixture to remove ice during ground opera­tions. Next, operators apply a separate treatment of a thicker fluid, similar to a gel, to keep the ice from forming before takeoff. Departure acceleration clears the fluid from the wings by breaking the chemical bonds that hold the fluid together, allowing no disruption to the aerodynamics needed for flight. An interesting technology scientists are exploring to address icing hazards and which may be developed in the future stems from poisonous frogs. In an article in a 2015 edition of Advanced Material Interf aces written by mechanical and aerospace engineering researchers at Arizona State University, this new technology was show­cased as a means for aircraft wings to de-ice themselves by secreting anti-freeze, similar to the way a dart frog's skin secretes toxin when it is threatened. Two thin layers would be sprayed onto the wing of the plane. The outer, porous layer would protect the inner layer against outside elements while the inner layer would be infused with antifreeze. As the outer layer fails, the inner layer would release the antifreeze to prevent ice accumulation. The researchers tout that such a two-layer skin model can delay accumulation of some freezing precipitation up to 60 times longer than the next best material. This should not affect airflow over the wing, but instead, be a safe option to keep wings clean of ice and frost during flight. To understand the critical role that de-icing plays in aviation, it is important to note that business analysts predict it will be a billion dollar market by 2020. With aviation projected to grow internationally, countries around the world are expected to witness a surge in demand for aircraft de-icing systems. More vendors are enter­ing the market with different technology and equipment for containment, collec­tion, recycling/recovery, and treatment. Infrared systems are another emerging technology that airports are turning to for de-icing. Planes can park in an open hangar where infrared radiation melts frost, snow, and ice, and minimum glycol is used. Advantages to this include lower fluid costs, being more environmentally friendly, and faster throughput. However, the technology has been slow to catch on because it is difficult to find the space to build the infrared structure since it is about 100 feet tall, and a structure that tall cannot be built too close to an active runway. Improved weather forecasting can also help airports with planning for de-icing and anti-icing. Continuously updated forecasts help airport operators make decisions on deicing procedures. If more than necessary resources are used for de-icing as a result of inaccurate forecasts, it is a waste of manpower and money. The National Center for Atmospheric Research together with the federal aviation administration developed the Weather Support to De-icing Decision Making (WSDDM) tool. Data comes from Doppler radars, surface weather stations, and snow gauges within the terminal area. The system then graphically depicts this information for airline station controls, dispatchers, de-icing facilities, airline snow desks, and federal aviation administration air traffic managers to help make decisions about the appropriate measures to take care of the aircraft. Simulators have recently emerged that allow deicing personnel to train with icing conditions. The cost of de-icing/anti-icing training is expensive and some­times prevents new employees from getting adequate training before critical times. Simulators mimic video games in that they have controls that are exact replicas of the controls in the de-icing equipment. Such simulations also allow employees to change the time of day, control the amount of precipitation, and adjust the weather to create different, challenging, and realistic scenarios. Although aircraft on the ground are particularly vulnerable to ice accumula­tion, the future of commercial aviation safety must also address the detection and removal of contamination once aircraft are in the air. To that end, the federal aviation administration recently tightened their standards for icing certification. The update requires U.S. manufac­tures to show that aircraft can operate safely in freezing drizzle, freezing rain, and conditions known as "super-cooled large drops" (SLD). These types of precipita­tion can severely degrade airplane performance and handling. The intent of the rule change is to ensure future fleets will be able to withstand unexpected encounters with icing conditions with more resiliency. Since 1996, the federal aviation administration has issued 112 rules to correct unsafe conditions in aircraft related to icing. Future research also includes the design of icing detection systems, especially for tail icing, which is a significant weak area in the fight against the icing hazard to aircraft. SOFTWARE SAFETY AND CYBERSECURITY The attention of aviation safety experts is frequently called to new areas, often in response to accidents attributed to conditions that were previously downplayed. Such hazards are sometimes referred to as "sleeping giants" since they describe conditions that do not receive the attention merited by the severity that they pose and which could one day produce a catastrophic event. In the 1970s and 1980s, such a sleeping giant was Controlled Flight into Terrain (CFIT) . In the 1 990s, another sleeping giant was wiring safety. Some experts point to a current sleeping giant as being software safety and security. A future area in commercial aviation safety may be expanding awareness of software failure modes and the vulnerabili­ties of software to intentional attack by terrorists. Software safety first caught the wide attention of the public following the 1962 self-destruction of NASA's Mariner 1 spacecraft, bound for Venus, 5 minutes after launch when a coding error sent it off course. The problem was once more highlighted to the public during the 1999 loss of the national aeronautics and space administration Mars Climate Orbiter. The orbiter was a 338 kilogram robotic probe launched by national aeronautics and space administration to enter Mars orbit and perform meteorological observations. However, communications were lost during orbital insertion. The national aeronautics and space administration Mishap Investigation Board for the Mars Climate Orbiter published a report in November 1 999 and concluded that the root cause of the accident was that programmers had used English units instead of metric units when coding a thruster performance software file for "Small Forces" that was used in the trajectory models for the spacecraft. The result was a trajec­tory that resulted in a 57-kilometer high orbit instead of the planned 226-kilometer orbit. The orbiter was lost at a cost of approximately $650 million. The Mars Climate Orbiter was just one accident in a long string of losses asso­ciated with software bugs that also includes military and commercial aviation. In 2007, computers on board six U.S. Air Force F-22 fighter jets simultaneously failed when the formation flew across the International Date Line, resulting in the loss of pilot communication and navigation systems. In 2009, a Boeing 737 operating as Turkish Airlines Flight 1951 jet crashed on approach to Amsterdam. The altimeter, one of two on the airplane that displays the height above ground, malfunctioned. In a perfect example of different factors combining to produce an accident, the incorrect altitude reading at the time when the aircraft started to follow the glidepath on approach triggered the software to greatly reduce power to the engines because the aircraft thought landing was imminent. The software simply followed the programming, although any human pilot actually hand flying the aircraft and aware of the actual altitude above landing would not have reduced engine power so significantly in such a circumstance. The crew noticed this too late to take the appropriate action to increase the thrust to recover, causing the aircraft to stall and the plane to crash. Looking at some numbers about software code will help explain why protect­ing aircraft against coding errors and hacking can be complicated. The Boeing 787 has 6.5 million lines of software code, a number that has doubled every 4 years since 1970. The same reliance on software is present in modern cars. The 2010 Mercedes S Class has 20 million lines of code. Software now constitutes 70% of an aerospace system's development cost. When an automated analysis was performed of the 2 million lines of code used in the Martian rover Curiosity to detect anoma­lies, around 2,000 defects were detected. Some scientists estimate that 15 to 50 errors are present in each 1,000 lines of code. Software safety also applies to the support structure for commercial aviation. In 2015, a software glitch in a new and much touted air traffic control computer system forced controllers to revert to backup, manual procedures. The result was almost 500 commercial flight delays and another 470 cancellations up and down the U.S. East Coast. The failure was traced to the Lockheed Martin En Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) system that replaced a 40-year-old En Route Host computer system managing traffic in U.S. airspace at all 20 of the FAA's en route air traffic control centers. In aviation, glitches in software extend beyond possible coding errors. The avi­ation industry has made great strides in physical security since the September 2001 terrorist attacks but it still has not fully addressed potential cyber threats. Possible security breaches could cause severe harm to everyday operations. Commercial aviation operations depend on a highly networked and interconnected system that encompasses voice and data communications between aircraft, air traffic control, and satellite stations feeding data through this system. Herein lies the problem that the more networked the environment, the greater the opportunity to exploit any of its weaknesses. Cyber threats will continue to persist in the 21st century and may possibly grow, so there will continue to be a need to protect confidentiality, integrity, and the availability of information systems as the number of passengers and flights increase internationally. Incidents recently have demonstrated that terrorists are increasingly interested in targeting the aviation sector. In 201 1 , radio hackers spoke on the frequency of British air traffic controllers, giving fictitious instructions to pilots and making fake distress calls. Again in 2011, the Internet security company Pure Hacking executed an infiltration on an airline network. In just one attack, the tester was able to completely compromise an airline network, which included cap­turing credit card numbers, plans, communications, and databases. Groups interested in hacking include three main parties, all with different objectives: • Hackers, who represent the largest group, are most interested in the challenge of executing a security breach rather than trying to disrupt operations. • Terrorists are arguably the most serious threat. Aviation continues to be a prime target for those seeking a visible, damaging impact on public infrastructure. Though terrorists mainly used the Internet to communicate for recruitment and propaganda, there has already been some evidence of them conducing cyberattacks. • Nation states are the third group interested in cyberattacks. Their hostile activi­ties have targeted the aviation industry to gather sensitive and proprietary information rather than targeting airports, communication, or aircraft in flight. Aviation professionals in the United States and Europe disagree on the best way to protect the industry from potential cyberattacks. The European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) believes that all airplanes, regardless of size, should be sub­ject to the same cybersecurity standards. On the other hand, the federal aviation administration believes that only larger planes should be subject to stricter requirements. There are no strict regulations mandating the industry to report cybersecurity threats and incidents. Some lawmakers are urging that there should be more mandated reporting of breaches in airlines since they are such a critical component of a country's economy. The european union aviation safety agency recently established a special committee to fight the continuously changing landscape of cyber threats against aviation. The threat seems daunting and immediate, although it should be noted that, to date, no verified cyberattack has successfully hacked a commercial airliner's system while in flight. Yet, this does not mean that hackers would not target an aircraft's networks, ground-based systems, navigation, and cabin entertainment. The field of software safety and security will likely receive significantly more attention in the near future to protect commercial aviation safety. HUMAN PERFORMANCE AND RELIABILITY LASERS One hazard to pilots during flight that bears mentioning is how lasers have recently become an increased threat. Over the past few years, there have been more and more reports of people on the ground shining lasers up at aircraft. It may not seem very harmful, but it actually is equivalent to the flash of a camera in a pitch black car at night. Although permanent damage to the eyes from laser exposure in these circumstances is rare and such laser effects on vision are usu­ally resolved in 2 to 3 days, there are precedents for pilots being visually disabled for several years due to laser strikes. The light can temporarily blind crew, create glare, and cause distraction. A laser hitting the glass windows on a flight deck may refract light across the windshields, making it very hard to see outside. Imagine pilots being temporarily blinded when rolling down the runway for takeoff or in the final seconds of an approach prior to landing. The effects could be disastrous. Furthermore, some lasers operate in the infrared part of the light spectrum and can damage pilot vision while being invisible. In other words, pilots may suffer laser strikes and not know that they have been hit. As of 2015, the federal aviation administration recorded over 5,000 laser strikes to aircraft per year, up from 2,837 for 2010. Some of the leading airports reporting laser strikes in the United States are Los Angeles, Phoenix, Houston, Las Vegas, and Dallas Fort Worth. Since the effects of the laser severely compromise the safety of pilots, in 2011, the federal aviation administration started imposing civil penalties on people who pointed lasers at aircraft. In that year, the maximum fine was $ 11,000. However, since the hazard to aviation safety posed by lasers is so serious, Congress increased the penalties in 2012, and the FBI has made it a felony to disrupt airplanes with lasers. Anyone convicted of pointing a laser at an aircraft can now be sentenced to 20 years in prison and a $250,000 fine. Recently a man was sentenced to 14 years in prison for targeting a Fresno Police helicopter with a laser. In addition to pursuing the users of lasers, lawmakers have also attempted to legislate the sale of high-powered, long-range lasers, which can produce devastating effects yet are rather inexpensive and easy to purchase. PsYCHOLOGICAL FITNESS FOR DUTY On March 24, 2015, an Airbus 320 operating as Germanwings Flight 9525 flying from Barcelona, Spain to Dusseldorf, Germany crashed in the French Alps, killing all 150 passengers and crew. As details started to emerge in the days following the horrific crash, it became known that pilot Andreas Lubitz had deliberately crashed the aircraft. The initial suspicions were confirmed in the preliminary report published by the French authority responsible for civil aviation accident investigations, the Bureau d'Enquetes et d'Analyses pour Ia securite de /'aviation civile (BEA). The initial findings indicated that the first officer locked the captain out of the flight deck and set the aircraft on a collision course into the terrain. Although pilot sui­cides while flying had occurred in the past, the Germanwings disaster caused world shock at the notion that one mentally unstable person could bring so much pain and suffering to others in such a violent fashion. Equally shocking was learning how limited most aircraft operators are to detecting the mental health problems of employees. The Germanwings pilot had been treated for depression for a lengthy period prior to obtaining his pilot cre­dentials and had known suicidal tendencies. Nevertheless, he was still certified to fly an extremely sophisticated piece of equipment and had the lives of passengers in his hands. A study of the tragedy and of other similar events in aviation has revealed interesting findings. Figure 14-13 shows investigators examining the wreckage of Germanwings Flight 9525. The Germanwings tragedy brought the issue of mental health to the forefront in 2015, but there is a significant list of previous events that showcase the ongo­ing importance of psychological fitness for duty. In 1976, a pilot stole an Aeroflot An-2 and flew it into the neighborhood where his ex-wife lived, killing 1 1 people on the ground. In 1994, a disgruntled Federal Express flight engineer facing termi­nation of employment and flying as a deadheading passenger attempted to hijack a Federal Express McDonnell Douglas DC-10 operating as Flight 705. The hijacker wanted to kill the crew with hammers so that their injuries would look like an accident and then planned to crash the aircraft so his family could benefit from his life insurance policy. Other events pointing to mental instability have taken place in Japan, Morocco, Indonesia, Botswana, and off the coast of New York, and some have been prevented that otherwise would have been disastrous. For example, in 2012 a JetBlue captain turned to his first officer before departing on a flight and stated that they would not be flying to their destination, and instead, started yelling about religion and terrorists. In March 201 6, The Times revealed that 2 months before the Germanwings Flight 9525 disaster, an eerily similar event almost occurred. In January 2015, an Italian pilot flying a commercial airliner from Rome to Japan, apparently dis­traught at the notion that his wife was threatening to leave him, texted her saying that he would kill himself along with his 200 passengers. The wife alerted officials who quickly stepped in and remove the pilot from duty prior to the flight, without the passengers knowing anything unusual had occurred. The pilot is reportedly still on suspension and under psychological evaluation. One of the challenges at the heart of these fitness-for-duty events is that there is no consistency across the world for dealing with pilot health certification. In fact, most airlines do not have any process for the periodic assessment of employee mental health once they are hired, even though conditions such as depression, anxiety, and mania can be diagnosed. In 2013, the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) estimated that approximately one in five Americans meets the diagnosis for mental disorders. In the United States, medical confidentiality is controlled in great part by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which prohibits doctors from disclosing a patient's health informa­tion without written consent. However, a doctor still has an ethical obligation to disclose information when concerned that the patient may pose a serious and imminent threat or harm to the public. Airline pilots are required to undergo periodical medical screening, but such tests are not designed to detect psychological problems. Instead, the tests tend to rely on the self-reporting of conditions by the individual. The federal aviation administration can fine pilots up to $250,000 for omitting or providing false information concealing health issues that could impact fitness to perform duties. There are no clear and quick methods for doctors or regulators to intervene if they suspect mental problems. It is mostly up to individuals to self-police and report problems. Individuals may be reluctant to report psychological problems due to the stigma that they may have about mental illness or out of fear that it may lead to negative action against their professional certificates or employment. Coworkers may not report suspected problems in others because they do not want to be branded as someone who reports colleagues. To encourage pilots to report self-detected mental illnesses, in 2010 the federal aviation administration started allowing the issuance of medical certificates even if a pilot takes certain medications for mild to moderate depression. Before such a provision, the disclo­sure of the conditions would quickly ground the pilot, and therefore, many pilots hesitated to discuss their concerns about mental health with physicians As a result, pilots were avoiding the treatment they so critically needed. The new provision only applies to very specific medications and requires that the pilot also abide by certain clinical conditions. Research is required to determine how much psychological benefit is gained from physical conditioning and other techniques, such as meditation and mindful­ness training. All aviation professionals should be aware that psychological prob­lems, of varying intensity, are not uncommon and that they should be observant of coworkers. Four months after the crash of Germanwings Flight 9525, in response to the preliminary investigative report and due to the lack of current standardized guid­ance across the world, the european union aviation safety agency produced several recommendations for consideration by the European Commission: • Requiring at least two people on the flight deck at all times • Random drug and alcohol testing programs • The system of oversight for medical examiners • Creating a European aeromedical data repository The following month, the International Federation of Air Line Pilots' Associations (IFALPA), representing the interests and rights of pilots, responded to the european union aviation safety agency recommendations by countering as follows: • Systematic psychological or psychiatric evaluation should only be per­formed when a pilot is being tested as part of the hiring process and prior to employment. • Once employed, if a need arises for additional testing, known as for-cause test­ing, then such testing should ensure that safeguards are in place to protect the pilot. The balance between trying to prevent a recurrence of a tragedy such as Germanwings Flight 9525 and protecting individual privacy rights presents a for­midable challenge going forward. The debate centers on the question of whether privacy laws protecting medical records from release should provide some flexibility for employers of employees with special responsibilities, such as airline pilots, aviation maintenance technicians, and air traffic controllers. Employers need the flexibility to manage these sensitive issues, yet labor groups often feel that such flexibility could compromise privacy, and therefore, prospects of continued employment. Although a more robust system for detecting emerging mental health prob­lems and reporting the condition so that pilots receive prompt medical attention may prevent future versions of Germanwings Flight 9525, pilot health advocates have also voiced the concern that revealing mental health conditions in the inter­est of safety may actually work against safety. They argue that the provision may cause some pilots to attempt to hide their condition instead of seeking treatment, although the counter-argument is sometimes made that pilots already frequently hide medical conditions that may negatively impact their performance. One solution as we move into the future is for each airline or flight depart­ment to implement a carefully constructed fitness for duty program as part of their Safety Management Systems (SMS). It is important for the program to have confidentiality, dignity, and respect as cornerstones to promote participation. When pilots start initial or recurrent training in the airlines, they enter intense training and are closely monitored. It is easy to detect any impaired aviators during this time because of their high contact with trainers. Back in the cockpit though, red flags for poor mental health may go unnoticed. The topic of impaired aviators is gaining attention, but this can neglect the other key members of a safety value chain, including flight attendants, air traf­fic controllers, ramp agents, and dispatchers. Since there is not a link that bridges awareness across all aviation professionals, the NTSB's 2015 Most Wanted List for safety improvements includes items that address these issues. Among the 1 0 items cited, the national transportation safety board urgently recommended improving requirements for medical fitness for duty and eliminating substance impairment in transportation. An important alliance between the European Society of Aerospace Medicine (ESAM), the European Association for Aviation Psychology, and the European Cockpit Association has formed to endorse a key set of guidelines for assessing pilot health and raising awareness for mental health issues. The initiative puts rec­ognition and acceptance of potential mental health issues as the first step in solving them. There should be a positive environment created for pilots to suggest issues and their requests for assistance to be taken seriously. Pilots should be able to share their concerns confidentially without it affecting their fitness to fly. India is also taking measures to improve the process for evaluating the mental health of their pilots. Psychometric tests for pilots of Indian airlines were set to begin in the first half of 2016. The country's Institute of Aerospace Medicine had started contemplating these tests after the Germanwings crash and set up a panel of experts to decide on the psychometric tests for pilots. This panel recommended four levels of tests. First round testing would start at the time a student wants to enroll for a flying school. The other three stages would be at the time of joining an airline or charter company, when being promoted to captain, and whenever they exhibit any abnormal behavior. Life can be difficult, with some aviation professionals suffering from post­traumatic stress syndrome or stressful family events that are difficult to com­partmentalize when performing professional duties. There are many psychiatric disorders that are not screened for that could greatly affect the performance of aviation professionals. Future debate will continue on which direction the aviation community should go for when screening for these types of problems. SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS safety management system vARIABLE INTERDEPENDENCIES Commercial aviation has managed safety in one way or another since the dawn of flight, but over the last decade, regulating government agencies has created a useful business approach to accident prevention described as Safety Management Systems (SMS). The primary goal of safety management system is to institutionalize the processes for safety deci­sion making throughout an organization that relies on managing safety through measurement. It is a scientific approach to managing safety. Whether awareness comes through collected numerical data or the input of employees, recognizing that there are many opportunities to prevent an accident is the first step in moving from a reactive to a proactive or predictive safety culture. Safety is not one-directional: it starts both at the bottom of the organization and top of the organization. Senior management sets the tone for safety and managers are ultimately accountable for safety. CEOs play a critical role and so do all avia­tion professionals, regardless of their positions. International Civil Aviation Organization has recommended that all aviation authorities design and integrate a safety management system system into their operations. The federal aviation administration has begun working on this through setting up the safety management system Advisory and Rulemaking Committee (SMS ARC). In addition, they also require that all federal aviation administration services and offices adopt a common aviation safety management system (AVSSMS). By using SMS, organizations are able to examine and make decisions about their operations. From their analysis, they can readily adapt to change, using quan­titative methods to promote efficient management through measurement of key performance indicators. safety management system strongly supports the continuous improvement of safety through data collection and analysis that provides valuable employee feed­back. By doing this, safety management system has the ability to greatly enhance the safety culture across the organization. As covered previously in Chapter 12 of this book, the structure of safety management system includes four components, with each component broken down further into ele­ments and processes. To reiterate, the four components and their scope include the following: • 1 . 0 Safety Policy: establishing senior management's commitment to improve safety and define the methods, processes, and organizational structure needed to meet safety goals • 2.0 Safety Risk Management: determining the need for and adequacy of new and revised risk controls based on the assessment of acceptable risks • 3.0 Safety Assurance: evaluating the continued effectiveness of implemented risk control strategies and supporting the identification of new hazards • 4. 0 Safety Promotion: training and communicating other actions to create a positive safety culture within all levels of the workforce Even though it is not readily apparent, all of the components, elements, and processes of safety management system are interconnected. One key area for the future development of safety management system is determining how changes to one component impact the other components and also how one single input can affect the overall SMS. A safety professional attempting to use safety management system to prevent accidents will assess the health of the safety management system by relying on audit scores and actual operational safety data. Gains have been made in quantifying the health of each safety management system component, but work remains in determining how an alteration of one component impacts the over­all safety management system and each of the other component within the SMS. Here are some examples: Are changes to safety policy or to key safety personnel more beneficial to the overall SMS? How does an alteration of safety policy impact how change is managed in an organization? How does a change in safety communication impact the effectiveness of hazard awareness? Knowing the specific impact of changing individual safety management system com­ponents would help to clarify the best steps that should be taken by those charged with overseeing an SMS. It is hard to pick which component should be given prior­ity when all measures contribute to enhancing the overall safety. The future of safety management system will include determining such interdependencies and customizing an automated dashboard for each organization that can more carefully control the overall system. Future safety management system development will also focus on quantifying acceptable levels of risk and creating management dashboards for determining when operations are encroaching on pre-established safety margins. Modern commercial aircraft have become so complex that managing the design, tests, and operations can prove to be a huge challenge. Since the systems are now so complex, new management methods must be developed that are equally capable. FusiNG PROACTIVE DATA STREAMS One future area in safety management system that will see significant development is how to integrate the different sources of non-accident data, sometimes called near-miss data, to detect negative safety trends before they cause problems. However, prior to addressing such future data fusion efforts that will allow us to achieve proactive and predictive safety, we should understand how we have arrived at the safety management approach of today. For a long time, the aviation community's modus operandi reflected a reac­tive safety approach. The relatively low accident rate of today is greatly the result of investigators who have studied accidents to determine previously unknown or underpublicized hazards, and who then proffered recommendations to prevent future accidents. Studying accidents to determine previously unknown or, sadly, previously known hazards is an example of reactive safety. The word "reactive" may have a negative connotation among some, but it just alludes to the fact that accident investigation reveals hazards after they cause damage or injury. Reactive safety continues being vitally important to accident prevention. As safety management in commercial aviation became more sophisticated, safety professionals started channeling their efforts into establishing a proactive approach to safety. Although many commercial aviation operators have embraced the philosophy and tools of proactive safety, others in the global aviation indus­try lag behind. The lag is particularly true with regard to key players in the safety value chain outside of the flight deck, such as maintenance and overhaul facilities, air traffic control, and airfield operations. Most safety advocates have realized that reactive and active safety alone are insufficient to detect hazards to flights fully. Let us explore the concept of proactive safety a little more in depth, since many global aviation operators are still evolving their safety management system from reactive and active safety programs into a proactive and predictive direction. About half a century ago, forward thinking safety professionals at a couple of European airlines pioneered the era of proactive safety. They realized that we do not have to wait for bad things to happen to detect hidden hazards. By routinely downloading black box flight data, a process known in the United States as Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA), they recognized that it is possible to add a proactive element to the active and reactive dimensions of flight safety. Proactive safety is particularly insightful when flight data analyses are accompanied by vol­untary reporting programs that foster a nuanced understanding of hazards and the sharing of information that would otherwise only be known to a small group of employees. Currently, there are several programs that will help aviation professionals achieve a proactive approach to safety management. The flight operations quality assurance type programs previously discussed are an excellent example of proactive safety since they help explain, in great scientific detail, what occurred during any given flight or across a series of flights. Having those insights proves fundamental to knowing how close we are coming to the limits of safe operation. A second measure is voluntary reporting, such as through the Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) or the Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS). This sec­ond program is NASA's voluntary and confidential reporting system for pilots and other aviation professionals for sharing close calls in the interest of improving air safety. ASAP and aviation safety report system help address the reasons why we are approaching the limits of safe operations so that measures can be taken before accidents occur. Other proactive approaches include programs that observe people in their work settings, such as Line Operations Safety Audits (LOSA) , and surveys designed to assess what employees think of their safety culture. Such data sources allow safety professionals to assess the root issues behind why we come close to the safe limits of operations. Despite numerous avenues for people to address safety in a proactive way, one of the major challenges to the above systems is that there are no robust frame­works to synthesize all the data. All of the systems work independently of each other, making it hard to combine information for a holistic view of aviation prob­lems. The future will see such efforts taken to the next step, the fusing of the data streams so problems are detected even earlier in order to maximize safety. Future safety management system development will attempt to find more streamlined and efficient ways to fuse data collected from such proactive programs for creating a clearer picture of what is going on safety-wise in an organization. Looking even further into the future of SMS, proactive safety will need to be coupled with anticipatory safety and even predictive safety to ensure safe ground operations and flights. Anticipatory safety relies less on probabilistic measure­ment and can be more qualitative. Predictive safety is the investigation of potential hazards that do not yet exist but that might cause damage the very first time they make an appearance. It relies on probability and severity as key input variables. Some air safety investigators believe that predictive safety is a key missing dimen­sion of many safety management system safety risk management and safety assurance programs. They claim that any successful effort to further lower our accident rate must attempt to attack hazards before they present themselves, in addition to relying on the active, reactive, and proactive dimensions of safety. An example of predictive safety is addressing potential hazards that may emerge when an airline starts operating a new type of aircraft. If the airline is used to operating small aircraft and decides to purchase a larger aircraft, predic­tive safety may uncover that current snow removal practices at the airport where the aircraft will be based will not provide sufficient wingtip clearance from snow banks on certain taxiways now that longer wingspans are involved. Such a predic­tive determination allows the operator to work with the airfield manager to adjust snow clearing procedures prior to the delivery of the new aircraft. TRAINING NEW ACCIDENT INVESTIGATORS When a catastrophic plane crash happens, it commands the attention of all media outlets. News stations will display countless videos and pictures, and stories will continue to pop up in the newspaper. With all that attention, it is easy to lose sight of the fact that commercial aviation aircraft accident rates are actually at a historic low. The fatal accident rate has been steadily declining over the past decades, and in 2015, the Department of Transportation announced its goal to reduce U.S. com­mercial aviation fatalities to no more than 6.9 deaths per 1 00 million people on board. Figure 14-14 shows one of the most recent severe commercial aviation accidents in the United States. However, one would not think that lowering the accident rate would, in fact, be problematic. With statistics at a 20 year low, the emerging challenge is training new accident investigators for commercial aviation accidents in the Western world because there are less opportunities to investigate actual accidents. Although there are multiple courses to teach eager investigators procedures and policies, they are not getting the hands-on experience needed to develop skills critical to the trade. Accident investigators count on several major skills to perform their duties: • Interpersonal skills: communicating and interacting with people. Accident investigators must work with a variety of people, from witnesses to scientists. • Report writing: each accident requires a report that explains the causes of the crash and recommendations to mitigate the causes and effects. For commercial aviation accidents in the United States, the national transportation safety board investigates and writes the reports. • Forensics: the collection, preservation, and analysis of material from the accident to help draw conclusions about what happened. A few new technologies to airport information desk in this process are electronic mishap tools, optical measurements, and software packages for root cause analysis. • Data collection and analysis: the gathering of information on certain items from the accident or incident to answer questions about what happened. For example, an investigator may collect data on engine performance to see if it was one of the factors of the crash. • International cooperation: working with authorities from around the world to gather information and possible wreckage. For the MH 370 flight that went missing, a few of the parties involved include Australian, Malaysian, Chinese, and American governments. Classroom settings are a good environment to learn about these skills, but it is not until investigators get to the field that they truly develop them. Universities can use crash labs, such as depicted in Figure 14-15, or can provide a simulation of hands-on experience by creating virtual crash labs. Much like a video game, these simulations allow students to walk through a wreckage site and examine the scene while dealing with biohazards and working in teams to determine causes. They can even collect data on items such as survival factors, human factors, aircraft struc­tures, operations, and maintenance. The future of commercial aviation safety may become increasingly reliant on virtual reality and other simulations as a way of providing quality training with less actual accidents to investigate. ENHANCING THE DEPTH OF ACADEMIC EDUCATION A new addition to the academic world that will help shape the future of commer­cial aviation safety is the new doctoral degrees in aviation. Until recently, there has been a severe lack of doctoral programs that specialize in aviation, and thus, aca­demic research in aviation safety has been limited to industry, government, and less in-depth academic programs. With the requirement of writing a dissertation, there is tremendous potential for aviation professionals or traditional university students to explore topics in depth that could enhance commercial aviation safety. Now scholars can take advantage of the new research potential previously not pres­ent. Three prominent aviation doctoral programs are presented by Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU) and the Florida Institute of Technology (FIT) in the United States and Cranfield University in the United Kingdom. The Daytona Beach Campus of ERAU in Florida is known best for its aerospace engineering and aeronautical science programs, but in 2010, the campus started offering a Ph.D. in Aviation. The focus of the program is to develop avia­tion scholars who can expand on the existing body knowledge and share their findings with the rest of the community. Students start with coursework in central theories and concepts in the aviation field; then pose and solve theory-based and research-based problems related to real-life scenarios; and lastly develop the leader­ship, collaboration, and communication necessary for academic work in aviation. South of ERAU in Melbourne, Florida is FIT. It initially opened to be a training ground for space industry professionals working at what now is the Kennedy Space Center. Today, FIT includes a wide variety of aeronautics, engineering, and science disciplines in addition to aviation studies. Their Ph.D. in Aviation Sciences and Professional Doctorate in Aviation (Av.D) programs offer a customizable mix of theory and practice, which allows students to explore aviation research and apply their findings to today's industry problems. Jumping across the Atlantic Ocean, another prestigious Ph.D. program is at Cranfield University. Just 50 miles north of London, it is situated on what used to be a base for the Royal Air Force. Today, Cranfield academics center around science, engineering, technology, and management, offering a Ph.D. in Aerospace among other programs. These three featured universities join other current and emerging doctoral research programs across the globe to help expand aviation knowledge to include tackling some of the more vexing challenges to commercial aviation safety. The future will hopefully see significant advances to safety based on the research prod­ucts from such programs, and the industry would be wise to watch for research findings with great attention so that research recommendations can be imple­mented into all aspects of commercial aviation safety. Sample dissertation research topics that have been completed or are currently underway at such institutions, and which could significantly enhance commercial aviation safety, include the following: • The Precursors of Runway Incursions Classified as Pilot Deviations: Factors Related to Hazardous Events • The Effects of Ethical Leadership and Organizational Safety Culture on Safety Outcomes • Cognitive and Behavioral Factors Relating to Aviation Professionalism • National Culture: Understanding the Impact of Cross-culture on Airline Pilots' Safety Performance in the Middle-East and North Africa (MENA) Region • Safety Culture Among Worldwide Aircraft and Engine MRO (Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul) Providers • Behavioral Traps in Flight Crew-Related 14 code of federal regulations Part 121 Airline Accidents • Validation of New Technology using Legacy Metrics: Examination of Surf-IA Alerting for Runway Incursion Incidents • An Analysis of Airport Surface Deviations using the Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE One area that may have the most profound impact on overall safety in commer­cial aviation and in other transportation modes is the use of machine intelligence to detect accidents as they are about to happen and alert operators of impending doom. Such an arrangement would effectively constitute the ultimate expression safety information sharing and real-time analysis. The book has shown how numerous innovations in both technology and human performance have dramatically improved the accident rate in commercial aviation over the past century but it has also shown that the rate of improvement is decreasing given that we have plucked all of the low hanging fruit, so to speak. What will produce the next breakthrough? Are accidents something we can cure, such as a disease? Scientific progress has allowed the eradication of diseases such as yellow fever, smallpox, and the measles. Some medical researchers believe that cancer may be next on the list. Can accidents be eradicated in commercial aviation, or at least decreased to near zero? Some would argue that much of the developed world already expects a zero accident rate in commercial aviation, but as a global industry, we are not there yet, and in some specific areas, significant work remains to achieve rates comparable to those found in developed countries. RECENT ADVANCES Recent advances in machine intelligence are enabling the creation of software that has extremely fast processes. Artificial intelligence can be explained as software with the ability to perceive, understand language, learn, reason, and solve prob­lems similar or greater than a human being. When such software is coupled with other similar programs and tasked with focusing on grasping knowledge and rela­tionships, deep learning networks can be created. What was once the science fiction concept of artificial intelligence is increasingly mainstream for society today. We now have powerful search engines that often times appear downright clever, voice and face recognition programs, driverless cars, and machines that can beat the best humanity can offer in strategy games such as chess, highly complex games such as Go, and game shows such as Jeopardy. Scientists and engineers involved in developing artificial intelligence are quick to point out that 2015 was a key year since that is when advances in computa­tional power and techniques allowed machine learning to leap out of laboratories and into mainstream use. Significant gains also occurred in machine emotional understanding and the ability to learn deeply and quickly in order to perfect their own processes. For the past quarter century, leaders of the accident investigation community have promoted the concept that any given accident is the result of multiple causes. Such causal factors can be identified as the accident sequence develops, but only if one knows what to look for as the sequence develops. An experienced air safety investigator can read an accident narrative and quickly start picking out key fac­tors that likely will result in the accident featured in the report. An artificially intelligent safety program could be tasked with learning such causal factors by reading all the accident and incident reports ever written; by observing flight simulator crews as they encounter malfunctions; and by monitoring the minor incidents, major incidents, and near accidents that occur in the millions of commercial air­line flights every year. Such learning could be further augmented by analyzing the hundreds of millions of flight data files collected through FOQA, ASAP, and LOSA worldwide. Doing so would allow the machine to learn how pathogens combine with operational variables to produce undesirable events of different severity and also to "make sense" of how such combinations can result in nonevents. In other words, the machine would learn greatly from both accident and near-miss information. The process sounds onerous, and it surely would be for any human, but it could actually occur with great speed with modern machine learning systems. The resulting super intelligence could then be tasked with applying the learning to detection, could have an unrivaled ability to recognize when factors are com­bining that appear conducive to an unsafe situation, and could provide an alert to the operator when a certain accident probability is reached. Such an accident probability alerting threshold could conceivably be set to different levels in order to prevent unnecessary false alerts. For example, a threshold set at 90% would delay alerting until being almost certain that an accident was inevitable, barring any immediate intervention. In comparison, a threshold set at 70% would provide an earlier notice of unfavorable combinations of factors and would catch more developing accident sequences but would also provide more false alarms, meaning that it would have decreased alerting accuracy. It must be stressed that such an alerting system, if designed, would not take the form of a robot sitting in a jump seat on the flight deck. Science fiction often depicts artificial intelligence as being housed in a robot that mimics human form. Instead, the intelligence could reside invisibly within flight deck systems, monitor­ing as many variables as possible through a combination of sensors, and comparing the factors detected to the combinations of factors previously learned that resulted in an accident or incident. The concept is best described as an intelligent "agent," meaning that it is an autonomous entity that monitors with sensors and acts within a given environment to achieve preset goals. The intelligent agent would rely on numerous types of sensors to obtain data for analysis. Such inputs could consist of laser eye trackers that measure, with great precision, pilot gaze and therefore can infer what is capturing a pilot's attention at any time, such as a weather forecast or takeoff performance data. Another sensor input could be voice recognition in order to establish precisely what checklist is currently being followed and if any procedures or individual checklists steps have been missed or incorrectly applied. A voice recognition sensor could monitor the intentions discussed during crew briefings, conversations with flight attendants that take place both in person and via interphone, air traffic control instructions that are received, and what information has been exchanged between different aircraft flight crews and between crews and dispatchers. The ultimate expression of an artificially intelligent system designed to pro­mote safety would be the networking of independent agents together to create shared learning and also shared recognition of developing situations. If each indi­vidual intelligent agent was tasked with continuous learning, real-time analysis near-casting of events, and alerting, and then shared that information with other agents in the system, the resulting aviation operation would come close to achieving a cybernetic expression of a "guardian angel" with the ability to intervene just before an accident occurs. Prediction of events further in the future would also be possible, with an associated decrease in accuracy the further out into the future that events are predicted. The concept is similar to now-casting in meteorology, where the accuracy of predicted weather phenomena can be quite high in the moments after the prediction is issued and for the period immediately following the now­cast, but understandably decreases in accuracy the longer the prediction is in effect. SITUATIONAL ScENARIO What follows is an example of how a network of artificially intelligent agents could prevent an accident from loss of control in-flight of an aircraft. Imagine an airport where arrivals and departures are operating on parallel runways, as is common, and in which the following situation develops under the monitoring of several intelligent agents networked together to prevent accidents. In the scenario, let us say that Agent 1 is tasked with monitoring weather phenomena at an air­port and could detect an atmospheric development conducive to the creation of wind shear that could potentially affect aircraft operating in the airport terminal area. Agent 2 may be aboard an Airbus 380 flying a final approach to the airport and may have the task of monitoring the performance of both pilots. That agent may detect how one pilot is focusing attention on re-reading the missed approach instructions on the instrument approach plate corresponding to the approach cur­rently being flown and may deduct that the pilot is thinking about the possibility of aborting the landing. Agent 3 may be aboard the same Airbus 380 aircraft. It may be assigned the task of monitoring the performance of the aircraft itself as it approaches the runway and may sense a thrust increase along with the associated increase in airspeed which when compared to the fluctuating airspeed due to atmo­spheric turbulence may be interpreted as a common pilot precaution against the wind shear. That same agent may also model the wake turbulence being produced by the aircraft and would know the severity of the wake turbulence at any given time, being able to predict how the winds aloft would carry the turbulence. Agent 4 may be aboard an Embraer ERJ-140 that is lining up for takeoff on a parallel run­way at the same airport and be tasked with monitoring the aircraft performance. Such an agent would know how much wake turbulence the ERJ-140 can tolerate at any given aircraft energy state and would also be aware of the programmed departure runway. The final key agent in our network for the scenario, Agent 5, may be aboard the ERJ-140 and could be tasked with using voice recognition to detect the controller takeoff instructions and subsequent pilot acknowledgment. A network of the five previously described artificially intelligent agents may produce a safety alert in the described scenario, recommending that the takeoff clearance to the ERJ-140 be cancelled. The alert could be produced the instant that the network recognizes that a takeoff clearance has been issued to the ERJ-140 crew, who could be warned by the system via a voice prompt such as "Safety alert! Cancel takeoff clearance." The flight crew of the ERJ and the tower controller may be completely surprised and perplexed by such an alert, since there is no obvious safety threat to the departing aircraft. That is because the combination of factors that lead to accidents are sometimes only obvious after an accident has occurred. In the scenario provided, the artificial intelligence network had monitored a large number of factors and had recognized that some of the factors were combining in such a fashion that an accident was highly probable. Therefore it issued a warning. But how did the network produce such a warning? How did it conclude that an accident was probable? In the example, Agent 1 told the network that the aircraft on final to the arrival runway would probably encounter significant wind shear in the next minute of time. Agent 2 shared with the network that the Airbus 380 pilots were actively aware of the possible need for a go-around maneuver and would probably follow the published missed approach instructions if such a procedure were per­formed. Agent 3 shared that if such a maneuver were to occur, the trajectory of the Airbus 380 and the large wake turbulence produced by the Airbus 380 would com­bine with the winds aloft to drift the turbulence directly into the departure path of the ERJ-140. Agent 4 predicted the position of the ERJ-140 in relation to the wake turbulence and calculated that the turbulence would pose a significant threat to the low-energy state of the ERJ approximately 15 seconds after it became airborne. Agent 5 recognized that takeoff was imminent for the ERJ-140. As a result, the net­work of artificially intelligent agents predicted that there was a high probability of the ERJ-140 flying into the turbulence and losing control of the aircraft, resulting in an accident. Therefore, the safety network immediately produced an alert that recommended the cancellation of the takeoff clearance for the ERJ-140. In other words, the super-intelligent network predicted an accident and intervened at just the right moment to prevent disaster. It may be that in the previous example that the pilots of the A-380 decide the wind shear is not too severe and end up landing instead of going around. In that case, the cancellation of the takeoff clearance for the ERJ-140 would be seen as an inefficiency of the predictive intelligence. Perhaps the network would detect that the Airbus 380 was continuing to land, instead of going around, and would quickly rescind the ERJ-140's safety alert. In such a case the network could be queried for an explanation as to why the alert had been issued, if the flight crew or control­ler wanted to know. It is important to note that the machine learning capabilities of each agent would be extremely high and, therefore, each agent would learn from each and every "false alert" in order to continuously improve the accuracy of its predictive algorithms. Essentially, we are describing a constant learning safety net­work comprised of artificially intelligent agents. It should also be noted that an adjustment to the accident probability alerting threshold would directly affect the number of false alerts. In the example, a thresh­old set at 50% may have prompted the safety alert when the network noticed that the air traffic controller was looking at the ERJ -140 holding short of the runway and detected the controller reaching for the push-to-talk switch, anticipating a takeoff clearance. In the same scenario, a threshold set at 75 % may result in a safety alert just after the takeoff clearance is issued, as happened in the provided scenario. Or, a threshold set at 90% may have (a) delayed the alerting until after the takeoff roll of the ERJ-140 was initiated, then calling for a rejected takeoff if the ERJ-140 was still on the runway or (b) called for an evasive maneuver if the ERJ-140 was already airborne. No human or team of humans could ever combine all the interrelated factors in the previous example with sufficient insight and speed to produce a safety alert, much less with any semblance of accuracy. Yet such a combination of factors is precisely how aviation accidents are caused. A networked system of machine intel­ligences could quickly and accurately determine when a dangerous confluence of factors start aligning and then produce an alert at a present probabilistic threshold that prevents the loss of control due to the wake turbulence encounter. Although some experts claim that the time is coming when fully automated commercial aircraft, with no onboard pilots, will be the standard means of convey­ance, before that day arrives, intelligent machines may virtually eliminate accidents in the same way that scientists have eliminated certain diseases. CONCLUSION The future certainly is difficult to predict, but we are able to extrapolate from emerging trends to explore probable upcoming developments in commercial avia­tion safety. We can say with certainty that airspace will be increasingly congested due to increases in traditional commercial air traffic and also due to new types of users of the airspace, such as UAS and suborbital space vehicles. There will likely be solutions adopted for the challenges of tracking aircraft operating in remote parts of the planet, such as oceanic airspace, and thus airliners will no longer go missing without a trace. Aircraft themselves will be designed with enhanced safety and security systems. Similarly, increased defenses will be provided to counter some of the shortcomings of humans, such as the threat of lasers to our vision and life stresses that can pro­duce poor psychological fitness for duty. The science of safety management will also continue to evolve in sophistica­tion, paired with a new generation of the most highly educated safety professionals in history. It is particularly interesting to contemplate a future for commercial avia­tion safety where artificial intelligence and safety management system risk mitigation techniques combine to ensure a seamless safety value chain. When taken together, all such developments will continue making commercial air travel the safest form of public transportation, which will be expected by an increasingly demanding public that is intolerant of accidents and serious incidents. KEY TERMS Accident Probability Alerting Threshold Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Artificially Intelligent Agents Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) Bureau d'Enquetes et d'Analyses pour la securite de !'aviation civile (BEA) European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA) Future Air Navigation System (FANS) Global Aeronautical Distress and Safety System (GADSS) Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) International Federation of Air Line Pilots' Associations (IF ALP A) Know Before You Fly Line Operations Safety Audits (LOSA) NextGen No Drone Zone Predictive Safety Proactive Safety Psychological Fitness for Duty Reactive Safety Required Navigation Performance (RNP) Space and Air Traffic Management System (SATMS) Space Transition Corridors (STCs) Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Weather Support to De-icing Decision Making (WSDDM) REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. How do commercial aircraft flight crew know what minimum altitudes must be flown in order to address threats posed by surface to air missiles? 2. Explain the potential hazards presented by UAS in today's airspace. 3. Explain why it is so hard to prevent illegal UAS operations. 4. Will integrating commercial space operations into the current air traffic con-trol system increase the workload on controllers? Why or why not? 5. List three challenges associated with oceanic tracking. 6. Describe one emerging technology available for de-icing planes on the ground. 7. Is it too harsh to charge a civilian with a felony for pointing a laser up at a plane? Discuss your response. 8. Differentiate between physiological and psychological fitness for duty. Is it more important to screen for physiological or psychological fitness for duty? Or should they be given equal consideration? 9. What are the potential benefits and drawbacks associated with requiring doc­ tors to report pilot psychological problems? 10. If you were a safety management system manager who was given an extra $500,000 to invest, would you choose to invest it in hazard identification and analysis or training competencies? What is your rationale for deciding to invest where you did? How do you think this will affect the overall safety management system? 11. What are some topics from this chapter that you would be interested in exploring if you were to pursue an aviation-related Ph.D. or Av.D degree? Why do you think your choices merit additional research? 12. Provide a specific example of how a future warning system based on artificial intelligence may prevent an accident.