CHAPTER SEVEN INTRODUCTION Many readers will have heard about the "big data" revolution that continues to spread across all segments of life. Increasingly, managers both within and outside of aviation safety circles are demanding more specialized information to make informed decisions. In the past, aviation relied heavily on data and recommenda­tions from the painful and lengthy process of accident investigations to make safety improvements. That approach has worked very well. However, commercial aviation in many parts of the world now faces what can be called a wonderful dilemma. We are no longer having a sufficient number of serious accidents to provide continuous and significant improvements to safety. There are many hazards and risks to avia­tion operations, yet the paucity of accidents requires a new, proactive approach. In past decades, our frequent accident investigations helped us make con­tinuous and significant improvements in areas such as engine reliability, structural inspection processes, weather reporting, and personnel training, and produced numerous technologies that have made airline flying the safest form of transporta­tion today. So where do we go from here? It may appear confusing to the reader at first, but it is a mathematical fact that the same current low accident rate over time will produce more and more accidents as the demand for air travel increases, simply due to the increase in exposure to hazards. Mathematics makes it clear that a steady accident rate combined with an increase in traffic means an increase in the number of accidents. Since there is every indication that commercial air travel will continue to increase, we must do something as an industry in order to continue to decrease the accident rate so that we do not increase the number of accidents. Fortunately, human ingenuity has figured out that we do not have to have acci­dents in order to prevent them. At the heart of an accident is a series of hazards, previously only unmasked through accident investigation. Those same hazards can be unveiled through observation and analysis techniques known collectively as pro­active safety. This term means that we can identify hazards that may not be obvious before the hazard triggers an accident. Proactive safety is often used in contrast to similar terms, such as reactive safety (accident investigation), active safety (making real-time decisions based on obvious hazards), and predictive safety (determining how the future may produce new hazards). The predictive safety approach will be covered more thoroughly in our discussion of the emerging panorama of safety in Chapter 14. This chapter showcases the most commonly used proactive aviation safety pro­grams that help detect and measure hazards. Some of the programs can be used in stand-alone fashion, but the use of all programs together brings maximum hazard detection and provides the best chance of preventing accidents and serious incidents. FLIGHT OPERATIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE (FOQA) The first proactive aviation safety program featured entails taking quantitative (numbers) flight data from routine operations and using the data to detect hazards. Depending on the part of the world and personal preference, this program maybe called Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA), Flight Data Monitoring (FDM), or Flight Data Analysis (FDA). Some airlines even use their own spe­cialized term. For example, the process is described as the Flight Data Analysis Program (FDAP) at Southwest Airlines. The term FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE is preferred in the United States, whereas much of the world refers to the program as FDM. Some dislike the word monitoring in FDM because they believe it connotes the scrutiny of crewmember actions, and therefore, many favor the word analysis in FDA. Although the processes used for these methods of data collection are similar, the difference in terms also has additional meaning. In the United States, airline participation in a FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE program is strongly recom­mended but is still voluntary. For non-U.S. operators, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION requires that airlines operating aircraft that have maximum takeoff weights over 59,500 pounds partici­pate in FDM. Regardless of what we call it, the concept entails the analysis of routine flight data to enable early intervention to correct adverse safety trends before they lead to accidents. The process also provides an objective means for validating the effec­tiveness of corrective actions after they are implemented. Routine flight data refers to the numerical data pertinent to everyday, non-accident flights and the measurements of specific parameters, such as airspeed, configuration, and bank angle. These data are then compared against present parameters to determine how closely flights are coming to preset safety limits. Today, FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE programs have grown in sophistication and are powered by highly capable recording devices that can capture thousands of flight parameters. Figure 7-1 illustrates a flight deck picture showing control movements, engine settings, automation modes, and aircraft per­formance measures, all of which can be captured through different types of flight data recorders for later analysis. FIGURE 7-1 Instrument readings and control inputs are routinely captured for FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE analyses. (Source: Wikimedia Commons) The road to FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE has actually been quite long, considering that the powered­flight industry is not much more than a century old. In 1958, the aviation industry produced minimum specifications for flight data recorders (FDRs). Although a few other airlines were early adopters of the FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE concept, much credit goes to British Airways for commencing a robust initiative in 1962 with the Trident fleet of air­craft. Around 1985 solid-state memory cards started replacing the magnetic tapes of FDRs and allowing for easier data access. The framework for a modern FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE program began in the late 1980s by the Flight Safety Foundation. Their plan for the program has served as the backbone for FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE progress in the United States. In 1990, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION took the initiative to develop FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE program guidance by hosting a workshop. In the mid-1990s, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION started vocally proposing the FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE concept. In 2001, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION developed a rulemaking committee to formalize work in this area. The committee convened from 2001 until 2005, making signifi­cant progress and decisions about the development during that time. In 2004, the Voluntary Safety Programs Branch AFS-230 of the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION released Advisory Circular 120-82. This detailed the recommended procedures to be followed for the estab­lishment of a FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE program for commercial operators. As part of determining the process, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION conducted a pilot run to assess the costs, benefits, and safety enhancements possible through FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE. They provided software and hardware to four airlines who agreed to start FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE programs and to share the data with the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION. The FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION determined that FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE programs would be voluntary, as data collection and use for advancement was still in the early stages. The project revealed that the use of FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE in an airline environment could enhance trend monitoring and the identification of operational risks. On an international level, in 2008 INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION amended the Annex 6 mandate to introduce requirements and recommendations for safety management and safety management systems, including the adoption of FDMs by all non-U.S. airlines. There are several key pieces of technology, both hardware and software, that are widely used for gathering or processing the data needed for the FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE program. They include the following: Flight Data Acquisition Unit (FDAU). This device acquires aircraft data through a digital data bus and analog inputs. The Flight Data Acquisition Unit formats the data for output to a flight data recorder in accordance with requirements of regulatory agencies. Many FDAUs have a second processor and memory module that enables them to perform additional Aircraft Condition Monitoring System (ACMS) func­tions/reports. The Flight Data Acquisition Unit can provide data and predefined reports to the cockpit printer, directly to Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) for transmittal to the ground, or to a Quick Access Recorder (QAR) for recording/storage of risk achievement worth flight data. The Flight Data Acquisition Unit can also display data for the flight crew. • Data Management Unit (DMU). This device performs the same data conversion functions as a Flight Data Acquisition Unit , with the added capability to process data onboard the air­craft. Additionally, this unit has a powerful data processor designed to perform in-flight airframe/engine and flight performance monitoring and analysis. Some DATA MANAGEMENT UNITs have a ground data link and ground collision avoidance systems incorpo­rated into the unit. • Ground Data Replay and Analysis System (GDRAS). It is a software application used by safety analysts on the ground, designed to transform airborne-recorded data into a usable form for analysis. It also processes and scans selected flight data parameters, compares recorded or calculated values to predetermined norms using event algorithms, and generates reports for review. • Quick Access Recorder (QAR). It is a device onboard some aircraft that stores flight-recorded data but that is not crash-survivable. These units are designed to provide quick and easy access to a removable medium, such as a flash memory card, on which flight information is recorded. QARs may also store data in solid-state memory that is accessed through a download reader. QARs have now been developed to record an expanded data frame, sometimes supporting over 2,000 parameters at much higher sample rates than the flight data recorder. The expanded data frame greatly increases the resolution and accuracy of the ground analysis programs. One of the most labor intensive and costly aspects of a FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE program is determining and implementing the process for retrieving the data from the air­craft onboard recording system to the GROUND DATA REPLAY AND ANALYSIS SYSTEM . Items to consider are removing the recording medium from the plane and forwarding the data to the GROUND DATA REPLAY AND ANALYSIS SYSTEM location for analysis. Consider that some airlines have thousands of flights per day, which requires an efficient and consistent means for data recording and retrieval. For flight data that is recorded with hardware on the plane, such as some of the devices mentioned above, an operator's line maintenance department will most likely remove the medium during scheduled overnight maintenance. Then, personnel must send the data back to the air carrier's FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE office for analysis and will do so either by mail, electronically, or wirelessly. Such is often the process when the data comes from traditional crash survivable FDRs, as shown in Figure 7-2. Once the data arrives at an airline's FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE office and is prepared in an appro­priate format, it is ready for analysis. A skillful analyst using specialized software can extract safety events from the risk achievement worth digital data stream based on parameters, threshold values (e.g., descent rate in excess of 1 ,000 feet per minute on approach), and/or routine operational measurements that are specified by the air carrier. Data that could be used to determine flight or crewmember identities are removed from view in the electronic record as part of the initial processing of airborne data. However, air carrier FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE programs usually have a gatekeeper, who is provided with a secure means for maintaining identifying information for a limited period of time. This measure enables follow-up inquiry with the specific flight crew associ­ated with a particular event if necessary. Analyses may focus on events that fall outside normal operating boundar­ies, event categories, or as determined by the air carrier's operational standards and manufacturers' aircraft operating limitations. A FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE monitoring team then FIGURE 7-3 FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE provides scientific analysis of data important to a sta­bilized approach. (Source: Wikimedia Commons) reviews the events to assess their potential significance. Lastly, FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE events are marked for appropriate handling to pinpoint the potential source of the prob­lem and suggest appropriate corrective action. Figure 7-3 shows an aircraft maneuvering for landing and illustrates the crucial safety concept of flying a sta­bilized approach to ensure a safe landing. Given that the approach and landing are often the most critical phases for commercial aviation operations, FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE programs commonly set up parameters for measuring approach stability. A single unstable approach may get a FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE analyst's attention, but if a series of unstable approaches are detected at a specific location or with a certain type of aircraft, it is almost certain that a safety problem exists that requires further investigation. AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM (ASAP) The goal of Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) is to prevent accidents and incidents by identifying unsafe practices and correcting them through individual written submissions from employees. It encourages the voluntary reporting of safety issues by the rank-and-file people involved in everyday operations. Under AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM, safety issues are resolved through corrective action rather than through pun­ishment or discipline. The program's strategy is to create a nonpunitive environment through incentives for employees to report safety issues, even though these issues may involve an alleged violation of aviation regulations. The origins of AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM stem from the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION's desire to prevent the recurrence of the same types of accidents. Toward that end the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION collaborated with industry in the 1990s to establish several demonstration AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAMs to explore how safety information could be shared within and between air carriers. Programs were established in USAir, American Airlines, and Alaska Airlines and the results were successful. In 1997, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION issued an AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM Advisory Circular to promote the initiative even further. With an AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM, an airline enters into a safety partnership with the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION and may include a third party such as the employee's labor union. Information contained in AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM reports may be considered sensitive by some airlines. To address the concern about disclosure of sensitive information, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION takes strong confi­dentiality measures to protect AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM reports and other sensitive safety and security information from being disseminated to the public. When someone experiences a safety-related event or detects a hazard, they are encouraged to submit a written account to the operator's AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM committee about the event and how it involves an operational or maintenance issue. Submissions should describe the situation in detail so that it can be evaluated by a third party. Employees can submit the problem electrically through a web based AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM report form, which may even be accessible from an employee's home. Many places also have a hotline employees can use if an online report is inaccessible. The Aviation Safety Action Program provides a voluntary and cooperative environ­ment for the open reporting of flight safety concerns. Information obtained from an AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM report should not be used for disciplinary action, unless the employee has intentionally committed a violation of law or regulations. This protective provision is important because employees are more likely to report problems if they know they will not be penalized for their "human error" mistakes. In organizations with low employee-management trust, sometimes there is a fear that management will use the information provided in the AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM report to discipline the employee who reported his or her error. However, all participating companies explicitly agree not to use information gained from a report for corrective purposes. An Event Review Committee (ER C) periodically meets to review AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM reports. The Event Review Committee is commonly composed of two people from each of the follow­ing groups: the company (management), employees, and the regulator (the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION in the United States). Their duty is to review and analyze reports submitted under the AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM, determine whether such reports qualify for inclusion in the program, identify actual or potential problems from the information contained in the reports, and propose solutions for those problems. (See FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION Advisory Circular 120-66B for full guidance regarding AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM.) A successful AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM cannot flourish under just any conditions. Instead, compa­nies must also have a robust safety culture that promotes behaviors and attitudes related to safety for the program to thrive. There must also be a strong sense of trust between employees and managers, as there is sometimes fear that man­agement will use the information from the AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM reports to punish employees. Companies should also align their AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM goals with the organizational safety goals in their safety management system to reflect their commitment to the program. Different employee groups at an airline can participate in AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM. Some AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAMs allow submissions not just from pilots but also from dispatchers, flight attendants, aviation maintenance technicians, and other key players in the safety value chain for any given operation. For example, air traffic controllers have a similar program called the Air Traffic Safety Action Program (ATSAP). AIR TRAFFIC SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM is also nonpunitive and encourages controllers to identify and report all events that have had an impact on air traffic control safety. Just like AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM, the AIR TRAFFIC SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM provides safety data that would otherwise never be reported without the use of nonpunitive, voluntary participation. Such reports submitted ultimately help in identifying the root causes of safety breakdowns and determine the appropriate corrective action. Figure 7-4 shows controllers at work at the Anchorage Air Route Traffic Control Center. An AIR TRAFFIC SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM analyst looking at that figure would see each person pictured in the control room as a potential means for uncovering operational safety hazards. AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM (ASRS) Somewhat similar to the previously discussed AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM is the Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS). The AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM made an extremely successful joint effort by the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION and national aeronautics and space administration to provide a voluntary reporting system where pilots, control­lers, flight attendants, aviation maintenance technicians, and others in the industry can submit anonymous accounts of safety-related aviation incidents. While AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM data sometimes remain local to an operation and visible only to those in a given company, AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM contains global data (although mostly with data collected in the United States) and can be accessed by anyone. The system was initially launched by the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION, which quickly recognized that their regulatory and enforcement roles would discourage the aviation community from using this new safety program that depended on voluntary sharing of safety events. Therefore, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION turned the program over to NASA, a neutral and highly respected third party, to collect, process, and analyze the voluntarily submitted reports. Under a Memorandum of Agreement between the two agencies in August 1975, the plan for operating the newly designated AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM was set in place. It detailed that the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION would fund the program and provide for its immunity provisions, while national aeronautics and space administration would set program policy and administer operations. The majority of the data comes from people working for the airlines. Aviation Safety Reporting System funding primarily comes from the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION, while it is administered by national aeronautics and space administration and maintained by Battelle Laboratories. Reports are sent to the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM office at national aeronautics and space administration Ames Research Center, where the data are analyzed and entered into a computer by employees of Battelle. Data from the reports are used to: • Identify problems in the National Airspace System so that they can be resolved by appropriate authorities. • Develop policy, planning, and improvements to the National Airspace System. • Fortify the foundation of human factors safety research in the aviation field. As discussed earlier in this book, progress in safety has sadly come at the expense of human life being lost. The creation of the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM is no exception. On December 1, 1974, TWA Flight 514 was inbound to the Dulles Airport in a cloudy and turbulent sky. The flight crew misunderstood the clearance from air traffic control and descended into a Virginian mountaintop, killing everyone on the plane. Findings from the accident investigation revealed that 6 weeks earlier, a United Airlines flight crew had experienced the same clearance misunderstanding and only narrowly missed hitting the same terrain in Virginia during a nighttime approach. A warning notice had been issued to all United Airlines pilots, but at the time, there was no method for sharing information among pilots in different airlines. After this, it was concluded that future safety information must be shared among the entire aviation community. The first step in establishing a national aviation inci­dent reporting program was to design the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM system in which everyone could place a high degree of trust. Today, ramp agents, aviation maintenance technicians, flight attendants, air traffic controllers, pilots, and any other professionals involved in aviation opera­tions can submit reports to the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM when they observe or are involved in an inci­dent or situation involving a breakdown of safety. All submissions are voluntary and are held in strict confidence. According to AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM, more than a million reports have been submitted to date and not even one reporter's identity has ever been breached. This is because AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM de-identifies reports before they are entered into the database. All personal and organizational information is removed, while dates, times, and related information that could be used to guess someone's identity are either generalized or eliminated. This feature of anonymity is important as the program is forbidden to use AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM information for enforcement actions. Through this program and the guarantee of identity protection, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION can demonstrate the value it places on the safety information gathered through incident reporting to the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM. Figure 7-5 illustrates the appearance of the web interface that is used by reporters when submitting safety incidents to the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM. Figure 7-6 shows an actual AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM narrative that has been inserted into the input field of the web-based form to show how it appears when in use by an aviation maintenance technician. Once the report has been submitted, it goes to the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM staff to be analyzed. The AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM staff includes highly experienced aviation professionals who have grounds as pilots, air traffic controllers, aviation maintenance technicians, and managers. After reports have been submitted and stripped of identifying infor­mation, they are read by a minimum of two aviation safety analysts. Their first objective is to identify any aviation hazards that require immediate action. When identified as such, an alerting message is sent to the appropriate FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION office or avia­tion authority. The second goal of the analysis is to classify reports and determine the underlying causes of the event. The safety analysts' observation and the original report are then entered into the AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM database. To share the findings with the aviation community, AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM has several publi­cations and studies they release. CALLBACK is a monthly safety newsletter that shares de-identified AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM reports with a commentary on the events. Another com­munication tool is AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM Directline, which targets operational managers, safety officers, and training organizers. The publication contains articles based on AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM reports that have been deemed significant by AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM analysts. Lastly, AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM occasionally conducts research on safety topics suggested by the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION or aviation companies. The goal of this research is to address real-life aviation safety issues and improve human performance in the complex National Airspace System. LINE OPERATIONS SAFETY AUDIT (LOSA) A Line Operations Safety Audit (LOSA), which is sometimes called an assessment versus an audit, describes a voluntary, formal process that uses highly trained observers to collect safety-related data on regularly scheduled flights. Initial research on LOSAs was developed during a joint effort between FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION, Continental Airlines, and the University of Texas at Austin. The Line Operations Safety Audit involves an observer, often a trusted airline captain, who rides in the jumpseat in the flight deck of an aircraft to annotate data about flight crew behavior. He or she also aims to assess crew strategy for manag­ing threats and errors under conditions of operational complexity. These threats and errors are part of everyday operations that crew members must manage to maintain flight safety. INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION also promotes the importance of Line Operations Safety Audit to the interna­tional aviation community in its Line Operations Safety Audit Manual. Since Line Operations Safety Audit 's primary objective is to identify strengths and weaknesses dur­ing normal flight operations, observations occur on regularly scheduled flights. The observer, often times a peer, is only collecting safety data, not evaluating or debriefing the flight crew. Observations are conducted with a guarantee of confi­dentiality and the assumption that action will not be taken against the crew for its performance during the flight. Acting as a "fly on the wall," the evaluator can use the Line Operations Safety Audit Observation form, which is based on the University of Texas Threat and Error Management (TEM) Model, or an airline-specific form to analyze systematic factors that can affect flight crew performance. Observers record the threat and error events that they see or hear and then write narratives that include contextual support. (See FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION Advisory Circular 120-90 to learn the rationale and procedures for performing a Line Operations Safety Audit at an airline.) To ensure confidentially, there is a third-party or a pilot association that provides personnel to act as gatekeepers. The data is then checked for coding accuracy and consistency with standard operating procedures through a data cleaning roundtable. Once data are cleaned and validated to ensure that they match airline operations, they are analyzed by someone who has knowledge about the airline's flight opera­tions. An airline might choose a third-party analyst if pilots have expressed concern about the integrity of the Line Operations Safety Audit implementation. The analysis of trends in the data can reveal the airline's operational strengths and weaknesses as a whole, versus the individual situations that are described through AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM and AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM submissions. Line Operations Safety Audit analysts will investigate the prevalence and man­agement of different events and errors that occur. Patterns that surface can show that certain errors occur more frequently than others, specific airports may be more problematic than others, and some standard operating procedures are rou­tinely modified or ignored. These findings then serve as the cornerstone for creating change. Two to three years later, a follow-up Line Operations Safety Audit can be performed to follow­up on previous safety initiatives in order to measure if an airline's changes have resulted in improved performance. Once the analysis is complete, a Line Operations Safety Audit report is written to communicate the findings from the audit. It includes information about what the airline should target to enhance the safety of operations. Both management and pilots will receive briefings about the results, and changes will be implemented to mitigate potential problems. Pilots may receive the information from a Line Operations Safety Audit debriefing event, airline newsletter, or other safety periodicals. Although Line Operations Safety Audit started as a safety program geared toward pilots, it has also evolved to include maintenance and ramp operations. Capitalizing on the suc­cess of Line Operations Safety Audit , the development of these maintenance and ramp Line Operations Safety Audit programs was conducted under the auspices of the Airlines for America (A4A) industry association. ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM (AQP) By the late 1 980s, human error had been increasingly highlighted as one of the largest factors in accidents among air carriers in the Unites States. The FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION and industry agreed that there needed to be more flexible training regulations that would allow for a more creative response to the threat of human error. As a result, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION modified a successful cockpit resource management military training method that combined front­end task analysis with backend data analysis to create the Advanced Qualification Program (AQP) training program. The ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM is a voluntary alternative to the traditional regulatory requirements for pilot training and assessment under 14 code of federal regulations Parts 121 and 1 3 5 that have formed the bedrock of airline training programs for decades. The goals of ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM are to increase aviation safety through improved training and evaluation and to be responsive to changes in aircraft technology, operations, and training method­ologies. It is a process to qualify, train, certify, and assure that dispatchers, pilots, and flight attendants are competent using Crew Resource Management (CRM) techniques. (See FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION Advisory Circular 120-54A for guidance on obtaining approval for an ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM.) The principle of ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM is to have the specific requirements of piloting a given aircraft at a specific airline determine the content of training and checking activities instead of simply making those activities generic for all airline pilots. The first step in ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM is conducting an aircraft-specific job task analysis, which begins with the development of a comprehensive list of each crewmember position. The list should cover items internal to the aircraft, external to the aircraft, normal, abnormal, and emergent issues. Essentially, it should cover everything a pilot may be exposed to within the sphere of operations. ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM analyses identify skills that are found to be applicable across multiple flight tasks. Additional analyses can be used to develop guidelines for the frequency of occurrence in routine operations, operational criti­cality, and success criteria. ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM differs from traditional regulatory requirements in a number of ways: Participation is voluntary. If an air carrier chooses not to participate, it will continue to be governed by 14 code of federal regulations Parts 121 or 135. • An ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM can employ innovative training and qualification concepts as long as it meets the same objectives as FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION's traditional training programs. • ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM involves proficiency-based qualifications. Pilots are trained to a standard of proficiency on all objectives within an approved ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM curriculum. Proficiency evaluation may consist of items that validate competencies in outlined objectives. Each air carrier applicant, rather than the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION, develops its own objectives that provide an approved means for the carrier to propose additions, deletions, or changes as needed to maintain a high degree of aircrew proficiency tailored to the operator's line requirements. Ultimately, this method allows for the collection of performance data on students, instructors, and evaluators which are then used for curriculum refinement and valida­tion. ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM can be tailored to include both specific training for instructors and evalu­ators and explicit training and evaluation strategies for verifying the proficiency and standardization of cockpit resource management crew-oriented, scenario-based training and assessment tasks. AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING (ASIAS) The FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION strongly promotes the open exchange of safety information in order to continually improve aviation safety. As a part of this philosophy, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION devel­oped the Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing (ASIAS) system to allow for collaborative data sharing and analysis between government and industry. As noted on the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION web page, the AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING program connects approximately 185 data and information sources across government and industry, including voluntarily provided safety data. The AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING program works closely with the Commercial Aviation Safety Team (CAST) and the General Aviation Joint Steering Committee (GAJSC) to monitor known risk, evaluate the effectiveness of deployed mitigations, and detect emerging risk. Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing is truly growing in size and scope every day. There is currently 45 Part 121 member air carriers, 20 corporate/ business operators, two manufacturers, and two maintenance, repair, and overhaul organizations participating in AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING. The program continues to evolve but has matured to the point that the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and industry can leverage voluntarily provided safety data from operators that represent 99% of U.S. air carrier commercial operations. The AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING database includes detailed records of some 20 million flights across U.S. airspace; roughly 200,000 incident reports voluntarily submitted by pilots; and roughly 100,000 voluntary reports from air traffic controllers. It has been reported that on average pilots file over 4,000 new reports each month. Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing also partners with the industry-sponsored Aviation Safety InfoShare meeting, which facilitates the sharing of Part 121 safety issues and best practices in a protected environment. This partnership enables AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING to provide a data-driven approach to early identification of emerging systemic safety issues within the National Airspace System (NAS). Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing retains access to a wide variety of public and proprietary data sources. Each source provides information from different parts of the NAS. Current examples of AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING sources include the following (www.faa.gov): • airborne collision avoidance system (AirCraft Analytical System) • ASAP (Aviation Safety Action Program) • ASDE-X (Airport Surface Detection Equipment-Model X) • ASPM (Airspace Performance Metrics) • aviation safety report system (Aviation Safety Reporting System) • ATSAP (Air Traffic Safety Action Program) • flight operations quality assurance (Flight Operational Quality Assurance) • aviation routine weather report (Meteorological Aviation Report) • MOR (Mandatory Occurrence Reports) • NFDC (National Flight Data Center) • NOP (National Offload Program office track data) • system design review (Service Difficulty Reports) • TFMS (Traffic Flow Management System) Under the Code of Federal Regulations, all AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING data are protected from the Freedom of Information Act and safeguard voluntarily supplied reports. MITRE, the operating entity of AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING, also is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act. Furthermore, the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION received re-authorization from Congress to protect data that support safety management system programs and studies for metrics and safety analysis. Under these exemptions, aviation professionals feel that they can share information that will create a safer operating environment. The FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION is increasing the quantity and types of AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING participants as part of a phased expansion plan, such as expanding participation in the corporate/business and small general aviation communities. It will also expand into the rotorcraft and unmanned aircraft systems communities in the future. GENERAL INDUSTRY (OSHA) RECORDING AND REPORTING SYSTEMS APPLICABILITY As previously stated in Chapter 5, the mission of occupational safety and health administration is to assure safe and health­ful working conditions for working men and women. In order to "keep score" in a proactive environment, occupational safety and health administration has basic employer reporting requirements. occupational safety and health administration regulations listed in 29 code of federal regulations 1904 require every employer covered by the occupational safety and health administration Act with 11 or more employees to record and report all employee occu­pational (work-related) deaths, injuries, and illnesses on occupational safety and health administration Forms 300 and 301. Employers with 10 or fewer employees are required to keep injury and illness records only if occupational safety and health administration or the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) specifically notifies them in writing that they must keep these records. However, all employers covered by the occupational safety and health administration Act must report all deaths and events that cause in-patient hospital­ization of three or more employees to occupational safety and health administration (in person or via phone to the occupational safety and health administration area or central office) within 8 hours of being aware of the events. Injuries and ill­nesses that require only first airport information desk are exempt from being recorded. Injuries include, but are not limited to, cuts, fractures, sprains, or amputations. Illnesses include both acute and chronic illnesses such as skin disease, respiratory disorder, or poisoning. Injury and illness records are used for several purposes. occupational safety and health administration collects data through the occupational safety and health administration Data Initiative (ODI) to help direct its programs and mea­sure its own performance. Inspectors also use the data during inspections to help direct their efforts to the hazards that are hurting workers. Records are used by employers and employees to implement safety and health programs at individual workplaces. Analysis of the data is a widely recognized method for discovering workplace safety and health problems and for tracking progress in solving those problems. Records also provide the base data for the BLS Annual Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses, the nation's primary source of occupational injury and illness data. Each year, the BLS uses a stratified random data collection survey process to collect injury and operational data (e.g., hours worked) from companies across the United States. It then analyzes, categorizes, and publishes the data by industry groupings called standard industrial classification (SIC) codes. Companies can use these data to compare themselves to their peer industries. occupational safety and health administration FoRM 300: Log oF WoRK-RELATED INJURIES AND ILLNESSES This form is used by employers to record occupationally related injuries and ill­nesses other than first airport information desk and requires the following information: • Employee's name, employee's job title, date, and the place (department) where the injury/illness occurred. • A very short description of the injury/illness, including the body part that was affected and what caused it. • The number of lost or restricted workdays that the injury/illness caused. • The type or classification of the injury/illness. occupational safety and health administration FoRM 301: INJURY AND ILLNEss INCIDENT REPORT This incident report Form 301 contains more detailed information on the injuries/ illnesses than that listed in Form 300. Every injury or illness listed in Form 300 must have an accompanying Form 301. Information on Form 301 describes in greater detail how the injury or illness occurred, what time of day it happened, what the employee was doing when he or she was injured, and the extent of medi­cal treatment the injury or illness required. Actual copies of occupational safety and health administration Forms 300 and 301 can be downloaded from the occupational safety and health administration Web site (www.osha.gov). Note that the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION uses the Mishap Report Form 3900-6 (or succeeding form) for its own internal facilities and operations. occupational safety and health administration FoRM 300A: SuMMARY OF WoRK-RELATED INJURIES AND ILLNESSES Employers ensure that the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Form 300A, the annual summary of illnesses and injuries form, and the occupational safety and health administration Form 301 incident report are retained on file for 5 years following the end of the calendar year that these records cover (29 code of federal regulations 1904.33). An employer is required to post a summary ( occupational safety and health administration Form 300A) of the total number of injuries and illnesses for the (calendar) year in an easily accessible and visible place (preferably on the employee bulletin boards) at each establishment. Totals for the previous year must be displayed continuously from February 1 through April 30 of the year following the year covered by the form. OPEN GovERNMENT INITIATIVE (TRANSPARENCY IN GoVERNMENT) Occupational Safety and Health Administration will be implementing a new, improved, and modernized recordkeeping system which will be made public to encourage innovative ideas in improving occupational safety and health. The final rule, which took effect in 2017, requires records of workplace inju­ries and illnesses to be submitted to occupational safety and health administration electronically. occupational safety and health administration will post the establishment-specific injury and illness data it collects on its public Web site while removing any personally identifiable information. The data release in standard open format is intended to encourage employers to prevent/reduce workplace inju­ries and illnesses as they will be able to benchmark their safety and health perfor­mance against industry leaders. In addition, public access to very large sets of injury and illness data will enable public health researchers to analyze the data in ways that could help employers make their workplaces safer by identifying occupational hazards before they lead to injuries, advance the fields of injury and illness causation, and conduct prevention research. Additional information on this is available at www.osha.gov. ENVIRONMENTAL RECORDING AND REPORTING As stated in Chapter 5, the mission of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the United States is to protect human health and the environment. At first glance it may seem puzzling to include environmental issues in a book on commercial avi­ation safety, until one realizes that the environment directly impacts the conditions for life, and therefore, can be considered a safety issue. Such a thought is particu­larly true when we grasp the notion that commercial aviation operations can have a direct impact on the environment. Under federal environmental laws, any facility or vessel (e.g., oil spills from ships) must report to government authorities about any hazardous substance that is released into the environment in quantities that exceed a threshold amount. In commercial aviation safety, such situations will often involve airport opera­tions. Threshold amounts are referred to as reportable quantities (RQs) and must be reported in a timely manner as determined by state statutes and federal govern­ment requirements. For example, safety managers involved with airport operations must produce reports when threshold amounts are reached in accordance with numerous federal government acts, such as the following: • The Clean Water Act (CWA)• The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), also known as the Superfund • The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) • The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) • The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) The environment can include air, water, soil, or a combination of these three media. A release includes any contact of a hazardous substance with the environment through either intentional or unintentional discharge and by any method (e.g., spilling, leaking, dumping, leaching, and abandonment of barrels or other closed containers containing hazardous substances) . Notification of releases is usually required immediately or within 24 hours of knowledge of the release. EPA regulations cover a variety of reporting requirements that include the following: • Medium environments into which the release is applicable • Listing of hazardous substances together with their quantities • Persons responsible for reporting • Time line for reporting • The agency to contact in case of a release • Fines for not reporting In some cases there is also a requirement for follow-up reporting which must include the original notification, response actions taken, acute or chronic health risks associated with the release, and advice on medical care to exposed victims. All these reporting release requirements help ensure accountability for cleanup; provide data for regulatory and public policy purposes; and enable federal, state, and local authorities to effectively prepare for and respond to emergencies that could harm humans and the environment. The EPA does not necessarily take enforcement action against releasers but it is quite strict against those violators who fail to report releases. OTHER ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS Other regulations (in addition to COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRONMENTAL RESPONSE, COMPENSATION, AND LIABILITY ACT and EMERGENCY PLANNING AND COMMUNITY RIGHT-TO-KNOW ACT) may also require reporting the release of hazardous materials. These reports will often be associated with operations at airports that support commercial aviation traffic. Some of these are as follows: The Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) Transportation Act (HMTA) requires reporting hazardous material released during shipping and handling. These regu­lations are administered by the Department of Transportation (DOT). • The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) requires reporting the releases of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and also addresses asbestos-, radon-, and lead­based paint. • The Clean Water Act (CWA) requires reporting of hazardous substances listed under 40 code of federal regulations 1 1 6.4 and oil releases from vessels and facilities into navigable waters. • Hazardous wastes listed in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) under 40 code of federal regulations Part 261, Subpart D, and characteristic wastes under 40 code of federal regulations Part 261, Subpart C are reportable if the release equals or exceeds the designated reportable quantity. CoNTROL OF AIR PoLLUTION FROM AIRCRAFT AND AIRCRAFT ENGINEs As stated in Chapter 5, air pollution from aviation turbine and piston engines remains a continuing health issue. The sections within applicable EPA regulations (40 code of federal regulations Part 8 7) deal with setting limits on exhaust emissions of smoke from aircraft engines, ban venting of fuel emissions into the atmosphere from certain types of aircraft engines, and require the elimination of intentional discharge to the atmosphere of fuel drained from fuel nozzle manifolds after engines are shut down. The EPA and FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION are also proactively reviewing new regulations regarding lead emissions from piston engine aircraft using AVGAS. Current information is avail­able on www.epa.gov and www.faa.gov. CONCLUSION The crash of TWA Flight 514 near Dulles Airport in 1974 brought home the fact that safety information must be shared freely and frequently in order to prevent accidents from happening due to hazards that are known by others. The TWA crash helped create a system for sharing hazard information which today is one of several proactive systems that have been established for similar purposes. Flight Operational Quality Assurance is a quantitative system that is excellent at exposing what types of hazards exist but not necessarily why they exist or how the hazards function against us as part of the overall operational context. AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM and AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM get directly into the minds of reporters, and as such, are excellent at explaining why hazards and errors exist but these tools are not good at quantifying the frequency of the situations or the context. Line Operations Safety Audit is a wonderful tool for exposing the context from which threats and errors arise but it does not quantify exposure across an entire operation and sometimes cannot get inside the mind of those being observed. Obviously, the ideal approach for proactive safety is one where multiple programs are simultaneously leveraged. In so doing, FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE can tell us how frequently we encounter unsafe conditions, voluntary reporting can tell us why specific hazards arise, and Line Operations Safety Audit can depict the overall context. These data sources can then be fed into an ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM training program that custom-tailors training to existing conditions. The AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING "big data" storage and retrieval system is the comprehensive means the FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION uses to work across boundaries. Safety is obviously a priority in the aviation industry. We cannot be blind to our surroundings and must constantly have our eyes open to dangers that exist around us. When we do see or experience something that could have an adverse effect on safety, it is our duty as aviation professionals to report the incident in an effort to prevent it from happening again. De-identifying information about safety break­downs greatly assists the effort, since aviation professionals are more likely to submit narratives when they know they will not be disciplined for making human errors. Another important common thread that is woven throughout this chapter is the idea of information sharing through full collaboration. Creating safer opera­tions is a team effort when everyone is working toward the same goal. Every player in the aviation community must be willing to contribute to these proactive commu­nication systems if they truly want to improve commercial aviation safety for all. KEY TERMS Active Safety Advanced Qualification Program (AQP) Air Traffic Safety Action Program (ATSAP) Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) Aviation Safety Information Analysis and Sharing (ASIAS) Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) Clean Water Act (CWA) Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) Data Management Unit (DMU) Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) Event Review Committee (ERC) Flight Data Acquisition Unit (FDAU Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) Gatekeeper Ground Data Replay and Analysis System (GDRAS) Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) Transportation Act (HMTA) Line Operations Safety Audit (LOSA) occupational safety and health administration Data Initiative occupational safety and health administration Form 300 occupational safety and health administration Form 300AOSHA Form 301 Predictive Safety Proactive Safety Quick Access Recorder (QAR) Reactive Safety Reportable Quantities (RQs) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. Explain why we can expect more accidents in the future if we continue with the same current accident rate. 2. Which reporting method described in this chapter do you think can make the biggest impact on safety? Defend your answer. 3. How does FLIGHT OPERATIONS QUALITY ASSURANCE contribute to creating a proactive safety environment? 4. Why does the EVENT REVIEW COMMITTEE play an important role in AVIATION SAFETY ACTION PROGRAM? 5. Describe how AVIATION SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM can be described as a collaborative approach to safety. 6. If your pilot colleagues were hesitant to allow an observer collecting data for Line Operations Safety Audit to ride their jumpseat on a flight, how would you convince them otherwise? 7. Can you think of any drawbacks associated with airlines developing their own training and assessment programs under ADVANCED QUALIFICATION PROGRAM? Can access to too much data be a bad thing under the AVIATION SAFETY INFORMATION ANALYSIS AND SHARING program? Please explain. 9. Explain the importance of occupational safety and health administration and EPA reporting to the aviation industry. List a few examples in which these reports may be necessary.