Chapter Four • Depict the existing evidence that cockpit resource management produces results. • Provide a personalized definition of leadership and of followership. • List actions of capable leaders and of effective followers. • Explain how a captain should encourage participation in his or her authority. • Describe how followers can practice assertiveness with respect. • Discuss the relevance of transcockpit authority gradients to CRM. INTRODUCTION The previous chapter exposed the myriad aspects of the human condition that make us so prone to making mistakes as individuals, in groups, and as organiza­tions. After reading the previous chapter it may seem that complex enterprises, such as commercial aviation, are impossible to operate with any hope of safety, much less efficiency. Yet day after day we see tens of thousands of contrails over the skies of some countries, and years go by without a single major accident in scheduled airline aviation in those same skies. Knowing the human tendency to err, how is such an achievement ever possible? In this chapter, we look at how humans are not only the challenge as sources of errors, but can actually be effective as the solution to the challenge, serving as agents of accident prevention. Humans actually form the safety value chain that keeps commercial aviation flying. At the individual level we learn both technical and soft skills designed for error management and then leverage those skills through a professional attitude in a team environment. Doing so we can actually produce less net errors than if we operate alone. That is a key principle behind a team approach to safety. Figure 4-1 shows such an operation, where a team of seven highly qualified and trained personnel from Singapore Airlines is performing maintenance functions on an Airbus 38 0 engine, on the ramp, no doubt under sig­nificant schedule pressure. However, teamwork only results in better safety than individual work if the members of the team master the technical requirements of their position and can properly interface with the other members of their team. The key to any team is the safety contribution of each individual member. The true output of teamwork cannot be achieved unless each member is striving for excellence. Efficiency and safety of aircraft operations can be traced back to the use of influence by leaders to affect the behavior and attitude of subordinates. Leadership skills are not genetic; they are learned through education and honed by a professional commitment to self-improvement. This chapter starts by examining individual excellence through the lens of pro­fessionalism to include how to obtain peak individual performance and how to add value to safety. The chapter then explores the origins, evolution, and components of CRM, then finishes with a case study and aviation safety report system narratives that illustrate the principles and practical aspects of the chapter. PROFESSIONALISM IN AVIATION The topic of professionalism has received significant attention from the NTSB, the FAA, and industry trade associations over the past decade. Some have defined professionalism as an employee's " depth of commitment to excellence," others as "doing the right thing even when no one is looking." This book promotes the notion of empowered accountability of all employees as a key aspect of profes­sionalism for addressing safety. The expression refers to the need to encourage each aviation employee to actively seek out hazards, to report the hazards so that they can be addressed, and to be held accountable if they chose to not act on the haz­ard. The concept is meant to instill the notion that everyone has a role in accident prevention. Regardless of how professionalism is explained, the core concept is one of striving to ensure that tasks are completed as best as possible and, therefore, we see instantly that professionalism is a key ingredient in the safety value chain of com­mercial aviation. The importance of the concept comes through loud and clear in the following excerpt from Stephen Coonts' aviation book, The Intruders: This thing we call luck is merely professionalism and attention to detail, it's your awareness of everything that is going on around you, it's how well you know and understand your airplane and your own limitations. Luck is the sum total of your abilities as an aviator. If you think your luck is running low, you'd better get busy and make some more. Work harder. Pay more attention. Study more. After a series of incidents in the last decade, the national transportation safety board conducted a 3-day pub­lic forum in May 2010 to focus on pilot and air traffic controller professionalism as a safety issue. Among the incidents discussed were the following due to each having significant ties to a lack of professionalism: Comair Flight 5191 in Lexington, Kentucky, where the aircraft took off on the wrong (short) runway in 2006. • Colgan Airlines Flight 3407 in Buffalo, New York, where the aircraft stalled and crashed short of the airport in 2009. • The fatal midair collision over the Hudson River between an air tour helicopter and a fixed wing general aviation aircraft in 2009. The air traffic controller was engaged in personal business at the time. There are accidents waiting to happen all around. We must keep our eyes open to warning signs that could indicate that an accident sequence is commencing or continuing. In fact, all of our senses need to be alert, as we also need to use our ears to listen actively and make sure we clearly understand the verbal information we are receiving. As humans, we have a tendency to passively absorb information without questioning the message attached to it. To be professional means to be vigilant and critical in all areas of our work to ensure a hazard-free workplace. Achieving Peak Individual Performance This section dives a bit deeper into certain conditions that can allow us to achieve peak performance. Each employee in commercial aviation should recognize that he or she can have a profound impact on the safety of a given flight and that impact is often associated with how well he or she exhibits professionalism. The good news is that when we see humans as the solution and not the problem, we realize that the contents of this chapter all relate to actions we can take that are often fully within our control, to add value to the safety of an operation. Let us start with the physical condition of each employee. We should each be in physical shape in order to obtain peak cognitive and physical performance. Numerous medical sources state the need to perform up to 5 hours of aerobic activity per week. In addition to the well-known benefits that such activity has on sleep and cardiopulmonary fitness, 5 hours of aerobic activity per week also pro­duces improvements to thinking, verbal memory, and attention (Johns Hopkins, 2006), plus benefits to memory, reaction time, visuospatial acuity, and increase in the distribution of oxygen and glucose via blood flow to and through the brain (O'Dwyer, Burton, Pachana, & Brown, 2007), and may help stimulate the growth of new neurons within the brain (Dana Alliance for Brain Initiatives, 2008). The benefits of aerobic activity thus have direct impacts on our human performance and therefore directly influences how much we benefit the safety value chain. We cannot address peak performance without making a serious mention of the horrible, direct, and often deadly impact created by fatigue in aviation. Fatigue can be mental, physical, or both, and is a feeling of tiredness. It differs from sleepi­ness in that it is a more long-term condition. Causes include excess physical activ­ity, lack of sleep, medications, and health conditions such as anemia, anxiety, and depression. Being fatigued has serious implications in the aviation arena, as workers are more prone to make mistakes when they are in this extreme state. Fatigued ramp agents have walked into spinning propellers on the ramp, resulting in gruesome and immediately fatal injuries. Fatigued air traffic controllers have forgotten about aircraft converging on each other resulting in fatal head-to­head midair collisions. Fatigued dispatchers have passed along incorrect weights and center-of-gravity calculations to flight crews, resulting in improper pitch trim settings that made aircraft uncontrollable on takeoff. The list is truly long of how this silent killer has acted against commercial aviation safety. Fortunately, we can take actions as employees to significantly mitigate the effects of fatigue, and thus, ensure that we operate as close to peak performance as possible. Aviation professionals must always remember their ethical obligation to arrive for a period of work fit so that they can perform at their best. Doing so may mean not staying up to watch a movie with a spouse the night before reporting for duty, hiring a babysitter to tend to a crying baby the night prior to a week-long trip, wearing earplugs when sleeping in a hotel, not drinking alcohol in the hours prior to going to bed to prevent disruption in the sleep cycle, not answering a phone call in the middle of a designated sleep period, and not going to see a famous museum during an overnight at Rome that requires sacrificing sleep. It also may mean knowing when to call-in-fatigued in order to ensure that the safety of a flight is not compromised. An organization is also responsible for an individual being able to reach his or her peak performance. It is not just all up to the employee! Organization poli­cies set the framework within which employees can perform at their peak. Fatigue Risk Management Systems (FRMS) aim to alleviate the effects that workers feel from fatigue based on the application of peer-reviewed scientific research. An FRMS is an effort to move past typical programs that mitigate risk by limiting the number of hours worked to developing a comprehensive plan to help work­ers. Prior to the introduction of FRMS the policies had surprisingly been the same for over 50 years. The federal aviation administration published Advisory Circular 120-103A, titled "Fatigue Risk Management Systems in Aviation Safety," in 2013 to provide guidance on how to implement the requirements of part 117 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, which covers FRMS. These new guiding documents placed new emphasis on fatigue and also changed how the commercial aviation community worked to manage flight crewmember fatigue. When designing an FRMS, management should develop policies and proce­dures that focus on the carrier's specific kind of operations and type of operations. There should be a commitment from leaders to reduce fatigue and improve flight crew alertness due to its direct effect on safety. They can do this by: Incorporating a letter from the Director of Operations level management acknowledging their commitment to managing and mitigating fatigue to improv­ing flight crew alertness. • Establishing and incorporating the air carrier's concept of a corporate Just Culture or Safety Culture. • Establishing and incorporating an open communications policy for reporting fatigue-related issues. • Establishing and incorporating a fatigue reporting system. • Defining how an event will be evaluated for potential fatigue involvement as well as defining an overview of the methodology for conducting a detailed root-cause analysis. • Providing for protection of privacy and methods to protect the employee from adverse actions that would discourage reports of fatigue. The air carrier will develop and implement a process for reviewing reports and the actions taken to reduce flight crew fatigue exposure. An FRMS also encourages a company to create education awareness training programs for fatigue. Content should include the basics of fatigue, effects of operating with the condition, and countermeasures, prevention, and mitigation. Additionally, there should be an incident reporting process to help prevent perfor­mance errors attributed to fatigue. By engaging everyone in the company, from the ramp workers to the CEO, humans can act as a defense against the safety conse­quences of operating with fatigue. Empowered Accountability Each employee in commercial aviation is a potential sensor, meaning that everyone can be trained and encouraged to actively seek hazards and report the hazards in order to promote safety. Furthermore, they should be held accountable if they missed opportunities to act on hazards. That describes the concept of empowered accountability. After all, most accidents are preventable. Granted, some very few accidents probably are not preventable. A somewhat far-fetched example of an unpreventable accident would be the crash of an airliner due to a meteorite strike. In addition, some rare accidents inevitably must result when one takes calculated risks where the probability of an accident is very, very low. For example, we rou­tinely fly out of airports where birds congregate during seasonal migrations, or in some cases, over prolonged periods of time. Extensive measures can be and are routinely taken to discourage birds from congregating around airports, but in the final analysis, the risk of an accident caused by birds cannot be reduced to zero without simply grounding all aircraft or birds. Many accidents that may seem unpreventable at first glance actually are pre­ventable. Others that occur because of a calculated risk about operating with a hazard can be reduced in number or severity by implementing appropriate risk­mitigating actions. Consider, for example, an accident that results from a commer­cial airliner striking a deer during a pre-dawn departure on a cold winter morning from an airport that borders a forest. Such an occurrence may seem like just bad luck with nothing that can be done to prevent the collision, especially since it was dark when the event occurred. However, at some point, someone in the deer-strike sequence likely had the ability to prevent or reduce the probability of the collision. Perhaps it was another pilot who nearly hit a deer a month ago and could have contacted the airfield manager and furnished information that resulted in an air­port Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) or filed a safety report with his or her company. What about the aviation maintenance technician who was working at 3 am on the ramp the day of the accident and who noticed deer run past him and toward the runway but did not feel an urge to ensure someone was addressing the issue? Maybe it was the airfield manager who knew there was a hole in the perimeter fence but was waiting for the spring season when the snow melts to repair the dam­age. Perhaps it was one of the pilots of the departing aircraft who knew that deer sometimes encroach on the field around the time of the planned departure, but did not practice any risk management when considering the chance of a deer strike. Each one of those individuals recognized an operational hazard and elected not to take action. Each individual had a unique opportunity to interrupt the accident sequence, but didn't. They could have added to the safety value chain but made a decision not to do so or did not even think about doing so. Complacency comes in many forms, but it always reflects an unprofessional attitude that fosters risk. Properly trained and motivated employees will immediately and decisively act on such hazards and are thus a key means to preventing such hazards from producing accidents. Such an attitude constitutes the professional behavior that this chapter tries to encourage. When viewed through the lens of professionalism as a key means to promote safety, each of the individuals in the hypothetical deer-strike scenario is accountable for not pursuing action to address the perceived hazard. Perhaps without being aware of it, each was empowered to act but failed to do so. A strong sense of professionalism would have created motivation for action, but such was not the case. Instead, potential actors remained mere spectators to a threat. It is as if they were passengers, so to speak, to the unfolding situation. However, it is likely that none of the individuals in the event sequence, other than the accident pilots, will be held accountable. It is quite possible that the pilots also will not face any consequences, given that many managers will likely believe that there was no opportunity to interrupt the sequence of events. Everyone's failure to do something illustrates why empowerment to act for safety must be taught throughout an aviation organization and why positive actions influencing safety must be rewarded. The responsibility to support safety by positive actions must be clearly understood by each member of the organization; it must be part and parcel of each member's sense of what it means to be aviation professionals. How much training, if any, does a typical customer service representative at an airport gate, a ramp agent, a dispatcher, or a flight attendant receive on the concept of empowered accountability? Many of us in a position to recognize and break a developing accident sequence remain ignorant of how accidents occur in the first place, which is the purpose of including the second chapter in this book. Mentally we are passengers in our own industry. It will not be trivial to reverse this situation. Despite the need for accountability, some industry leaders have not fully embraced the potential gains that such an attitude brings to safety. Leaders must ensure that employees are trained in the causes of unsafe acts and their relationship to aviation accidents. We must all learn how to recognize and properly report perceived unsafe acts and conditions. We must also understand that we will be held accountable if we could have prevented an accident, serious incident, or even just an unsafe event, but instead opted for complacency, thus allowing an accident chain to propagate. CREW RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (CRM) Here is an interesting question to ponder: if we all make mistakes, then what is the advantage of having two pilots over one pilot on the flight deck of a commercial airliner? After all, will two pilots not make twice as many mistakes during a flight as a single pilot? Let us see if the reader can answer the question by the end of this chapter. While the past chapter shared some of the seemingly countless ways in which humans fall prey to errors and biases, this chapter focuses on how the human spirit can combine with science and ingenuity to build better ways of managing our tendency to err and be biased. One major accomplishment toward that goal in aviation safety has been the development of Crew Resource Management (CRM). Stated succinctly, cockpit resource management is a philosophy for mitigating error and maximizing effi­ciency when operating an aircraft that leverages the presence of more than one individual. The concepts of cockpit resource management have wide applications to many facets of life and are used in many industries. In aviation, the people involved in cockpit resource management are primarily pilots, but also must involve flight attendants, external crewmembers, even passen­gers. Essentially we are referring to any people or material that can have an impact on the outcome of flight. All such people and material are considered resources, and how we coordinate the use of such resources is the practice of CRM. The U.S. Air Force offers a very useful explanation by stating, "CRM training is a key component of a combined effort to identify and manage the conditions that lead to error" (USAF, 2008, p. 5). Notice how the Air Force mentions cockpit resource management as a key, but not the only, component in addressing the conditions that lead to error. We pre­viously mentioned individual accountability for our own performance as another important means, but now we are discussing the team aspects of safety. To reduce error, researchers have focused efforts on understanding the human factors endemic to aircraft operations. Specifically, psychology has made major inroads in detecting how errors are formed at the individual cognitive level. However, such efforts do not address errors that arise due to crewmembers interacting with each other, be it through verbal exchange, nonverbal communication, or assumptions of what a fellow crewmember knows or actions being undertaken. cockpit resource management was developed precisely to address such needs. Other advances have been made in areas related to cockpit resource management processes and in how we train such processes dur­ing initial and recurrent flight training. Yet, the amazing fact remains that cockpit resource management is not universally embraced by pilots throughout the world. The world is a large place and only a segment of the pilot population work for commercial air carriers. Even within commercial aviation there are some pockets around the globe where cockpit resource management principles are not followed. However, those pilots who embrace cockpit resource management can significantly increase the safety of a flight, as will be depicted in this chapter. Most commercial aviation operations throughout the world have, to some extent, incor­porated cockpit resource management training into the pilot curricula and even into how they train other employees. Fundamental cockpit resource management skill sets include leadership, communication, crew coordi­nation, judgment, and decision making. Each skill set presents a seemingly bottom­less ocean of knowledge for use in both routine and abnormal flight conditions. cockpit resource management can be seen as a human victory over the potential errors that can surface in the complex aviation system. The ingenuity and creativity of talented minds in the accident prevention movement created cockpit resource management as a means for preventing, minimizing, and correcting the natural human tendency to commit errors before such errors result in disaster. Evolution Of cockpit resource management Principles cockpit resource management is so embedded in the minds of most commercial aviation professionals today that it is hard to imagine a world without it, but such a world did exist, and we are by no means finished with the evolution of cockpit resource management development. We must remember the roots of aviation to help visualize what flight operations looked like before CRM. In October 1927, Pam American Airways flew a Fokker F-7 Trimotor from Key West to Havana in what became the first U.S. commercial flight. Since then, individuals and certain crews have used the principles of CRM, although they may not have called it CRM, but it has not been until the last 30 or so years that the principles have been lumped together and taught as part of cockpit resource management programs. In the 1 920s and 1930s, most aviators were associated with barnstorming and airmail runs and, thus, were considered brave, even daring. The fatality rate was quite high in those early days and it took a special kind of person, often male, to undertake the profession. Although women aviators existed as the era of commercial aviation began, most women in the aviation profession were associated with flight attendant positions and were called "Skygirls." The 1930 Boeing Air Transport Manual provided the following guidance that today sounds humorous: "Skygirls should render a rigid military salute to the captain as they go aboard and deplane . . . there is no real need for conversation or contact." Such was the perspective of pilots as being significantly higher in social status from other air­line employees, such as flight attendants or ramp support personnel. The opinions of employees were neither expected nor particularly welcome by many pilots, although exceptions undoubtedly existed. The high regard and even awe that employees used to have of captains were partly a product of the heritage of aviators and also partly due to the nautical equivalent, the ship captain, where the captain's word was considered law. The situation remained for several decades. Although group dynamics had been studied as an offshoot of crew performance and accident investigation in the 1940s and 1950s, it was not until the Apollo era of spaceflight in the 1 960s that the topic continuing airworthines management exposition under serious consideration when national aeronautics and space administration studied the group dynamics of astronauts. As the Apollo program was winding down, awareness that something was wrong in commercial aviation started to grow slowly at first and would eventu­ally lead to the cockpit resource management movement. In 1 972 a Lockheed L-1011 operating as Eastern Airlines Flight 401 flew into the Everglades in Florida as all members of the flight deck crew were focused on a burned-out light bulb. During the troubleshooting, no pilot had been assigned the task of flying the aircraft and, although an altitude dis­crepancy was noticed by air traffic control, the flight gently descended without the crew noticing the critical controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) problem. That same year in Europe, a Hawker Siddeley Trident operating as British European Airways Flight 548 entered a deep stall 3 minutes after departing from London and crashed, killing 118. The accident was a result of dysfunction in crew coordination and, together with the Eastern 401 accident, served to catch the atten­tion of aviation safety professionals that something was seriously wrong with the human element in commercial aviation safety. In response to those and other serious accidents, the Flight Safety Foundation (FSF) and the International Air Transport Association (lATA) convened conferences in 1974 and 1975 in Virginia and Turkey to address the concern of human causes to commercial aviation accidents. The concern was growing within the awareness of aviation safety professionals but was not necessarily high on the consciousness of the public, but that would soon change. Just 2 years after the lATA conference, two Boeing 74 7 aircraft collided in foggy conditions on the island of Tenerife, Spain, causing the worst loss of life in any single accident in the history of commercial aviation. That terrible record stands to this day. The collision was a result of coordination breakdown, the false expectancy of a takeoff clearance in the mind of one of the captains, and the lack of assertiveness on behalf of crewmembers who did not question the captain's decision to take off without a clearance. A total of 583 people lost their lives in that tragic accident. One year later, in 1 978, one more accident occurred that would be the final straw that broke the camel's back. A Douglas DC-8 operating as United Airlines Flight 1 73 crashed near Portland, Oregon, after running out of fuel, killing 1 0 occupants. The accident resulted from the captain focusing too heavily on prepar­ing the cabin for an emergency landing due to a gear malfunction, while neglecting both the fuel state and the increasing concerns of the other flight crew members who were rightfully worried about running out of gas. The string of accidents all occurred due to poor communication and coordi­nation by the humans operating the flights so, building on the momentum of the safety conferences in Virginia and Turkey, national aeronautics and space administration decided to host a series of confer­ences in 1979 out of which the cockpit resource management concept was officially born. At that time the term stood for Cockpit Resource Management and was narrowly focused on flight deck crew members, often comprised of two pilots and a flight engineer in those days. In hindsight we consider the cockpit resource management principle that was born in 1979 as the first generation of CRM, since much was to happen over the next few decades that would shape the evolution of the modern cockpit resource management of today. Crew Resource Management has evolved considerably since then. Many experts claim that we are now living in the sixth generation of CRM, although sev­eral purport that we are already in the seventh generation, although we do not yet realize the shape that the seventh generation is taking. The first generation of cockpit resource management in 1979 focused on changing individual behavior, primarily that of the captain, so that input would be incorporated from other flight deck crewmembers when mak­ing decisions. Many of the captains of that era were born in the 1920s and were veteran combat aviators from World War II. The first generation of cockpit resource management has since been humorously referred to as "charm school" in that by trying to change the behavior of captains it was often perceived as trying to turn gruffness into charm. Around 1980 and 1981 two airlines lead the cockpit resource management movement globally, United Airlines and KLM Airlines. Both programs stressed management and personality styles. As one might imagine, many captains felt personally insulted by such initia­tives and were very defensive when told that they were exhibiting accident-prone behavior and therefore had to change. Can you imagine a captain of that era, who may have shot down enemy aircraft and been labeled a hero, suddenly told that he was a problem? As airline accidents with cockpit resource management components continued to happen, such as the very dramatic crash of a Boeing 737 operated as Air Florida flight 90 during a win­ter storm in Washington, D.C. in 1982, the industry and government continued to cooperate to shape and evolve CRM. In 1984, heavily influenced by the leadership of Dr. John Lauber, cockpit resource management was defined in such a way that was accepted by stake­holders as "the effective utilization of all available resources-hardware, software, and liveware-to achieve safe, efficient flight operation." Liveware, in this context, alluded to humans. As a result of these efforts, around 1984 the second generation of cockpit resource management took shape. Instead of focusing on changing individual behaviors, cockpit resource management now went deeper in an attempt to change attitudes and focus more on decision making as a group. This generation also recognized that cockpit resource management should involve more than just flight deck crewmembers and that others, such as flight attendants, often pos­sessed key information that should be communicated to the flight deck to prevent accidents. Special emphasis was placed on briefing strategies and the development of realistic simulator training profiles known as Line-Oriented Flight Training (LOFT). Figure 4-2 shows an airline flight crew operating a sophisticated mod­ern Fokker 70/100 simulator to fly an approach. When combined with realistic situational scenarios, such simulators host LOFT sessions that are grueling but extremely important for pilots to learn both technical and cockpit resource management skills, and how both skills need to work together to assure a safe outcome to the flight. By 1985 only four air carriers in the United States had full cockpit resource management programs: United, Continental, Pan Am, and People's Express. American and the U.S. Air Force Military Airlift Command soon introduced cockpit resource management programs, and the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps were on the verge of starting cockpit resource management programs. In 1989, a very serious accident happened that provided irrefutable proof that cockpit resource management prin­ciples worked. A DC-10 operating as United Airlines Flight 232 experienced the uncontained failure of its #2 engine, resulting in a loss of normal flight controls. The captain ably coordinated flight deck and cabin resources to perform a con­trolled crash of the aircraft at Sioux City, Iowa. The resulting crash killed 1 1 1, but there were 1 85 survivors who likely would not have survived at all had it not been for the cockpit resource management prowess of the crew. In the early 1990s the third generation of cockpit resource management took hold, which deepened the notion that cockpit resource management extended beyond the flight deck door. That generation saw the start of joint training for flight deck and cabin crew members, such as for emergency evacuations, placed emphasis on the role of organizational culture, and also started exploring how flight deck automation was increasingly a key component of com­munication and coordination protocols for pilots. Some vocal pilots voiced concern that cockpit resource management was becoming too diluted by extending it past the flight deck with all the increased emphasis on using external resources. Around 1992 cockpit resource management also saw itself being exported to the medical community to address similar group dynamics events associated with medical error in both routine and emergency care at hospitals. Around the mid-1990s the fourth generation of cockpit resource management was introduced, which promoted the FAA's voluntary Advanced Qualification Program (AQP) as a means for "custom tailoring" cockpit resource management to the specific needs of each airline and stressed the use of Line Oriented Evaluations (LOEs). This generation also fostered the pairing of crew behaviors to checklists and advocated the integration of cockpit resource management training directly into technical training versus as a stand-alone initiative. In 1998 the federal aviation administration made cockpit resource management training mandatory for U.S. Airlines through FAR 121 .404. It should be noted that this was 19 years after NASA's effort to start what became CRM, which shows the not uncommon delay in implementing new regulations that pro­mote safety. Around 1 999 the fifth generation of cockpit resource management took hold, which reframed the safety effort under the umbrella of "error management," modified the initiatives so as to be more readily accepted by non-Western national cultures, and placed even more emphasis on automation and, specifically, automation monitoring. Three lines of defense were promoted against error: the avoidance of error in the first place, the trapping of errors that occur so that they are limited in the damage they create, and the mitigation of consequences when the errors cannot be trapped. This generation also promoted the use of incident data in addition to accident data. This generation was influenced by the now national transportation safety board Member Robert Sumwalt and two co­authors who studied the aviation safety report system database and in 1997 published "What aviation safety report system Data Tell about Inadequate Flight Crew Monitoring." In the paper they were quoted as stating, "One pilot must monitor automated flight systems 100% of the time" and mentioned that "Monitoring . . . is the lifeblood of safe flight operations." At the start of the 2 1 st century, the sixth generation of cockpit resource management was formed, which introduced the Threat and Error Management (TEM) framework as a for­malized approach for identifying sources of threats and preventing them from impacting safety at the earliest possible time. Sophisticated and elaborate TEM models were introduced for intervention and rely heavily on human factors knowl­edge for improving safety in aviation. Threats can be any condition that makes a task more complicated, such as rain during ramp operations or fatigue during overnight maintenance. They can be external or internal. External threats are outside the aviation professional's control and could include weather, a late gate change, or not having the correct tool for a job. Internal threats are something that is within the worker's control, such as stress, time pressure, or loss of situational awareness. If the threats are not managed properly they can impact safety margins and cause errors, which are mistakes that are made when threats are mismanaged. Errors come in the form of noncompliance, procedural, communication, proficiency, or operational decisions. The TEM framework recognizes the relationship between threats and errors. In fact, many airlines are moving away from cockpit resource management training and putting more empha­sis on TEM instead. They feel that cockpit resource management is too broad and open to too much inter­pretation. If aviation professionals can identify the threats and manage them, then they can directly mitigate human errors. Safety procedures are in place to resist some risks from having harmful outcomes, such as inspections and operational checklists, but some errors do not have a buffer. However, we as workers also have the opportunity to resolve the error before it leads to a negative impact. To assess the Threat and Error Management aspects of a situation, aviation processionals should: • Identify threats, errors, and error outcomes. • Identify "Resolve and Resist" strategies and counter measures already in place. • Recognize human factors aspects that affect behavior choices and decision making. • Recommend solutions for changes that lead to a higher level of safety awareness. CENTRAL THEME OF cockpit resource management The evolution of cockpit resource management has been long and productive, and will undoubtedly continue into the future. Throughout it all, a central theme has emerged where leaders and subordinates work together in a way that maximizes efficiency and safety. Although many important concepts are covered in cockpit resource management training, the one most overriding idea is that of creating an environment that is most suited for the proper types of communication and coordination. The importance of a supervisor or senior employee setting the proper tone for his or her coworkers cannot be overstated in order to achieve the proper safety environment. This is particularly true if the supervisor or senior employee promotes inquiry and assertion by working to open the lines of communica­tion. Of course, the concept of assertion not only depends on the supervisor or senior employee setting the proper tone for a flight. Other employees must also be encouraged to inquire when someone feels that something is wrong and to advocate their concerns in such a fashion that does not diminish the supervisor or senior employee's authority, but that instead uses the supervisor or senior employee as a catalyst for solving problems. Henceforth, in our discussion we will refer to the supervisor or senior employee as the captain, given that so much of cockpit resource management development has focused on the cap­tain of an aircraft as the leader of the airborne team. However, the reader is urged to remember that the concepts being discussed transcend the flight deck and apply throughout commercial aviation employee ranks. This central theme of cockpit resource management of which we speak is best expressed m two elements: 1. Authority with participation 2. Assertiveness with respect PARTICIPATION. Authority is defined for purposes of this text as the ability to influ­ence others as a result of the office or rank that one occupies. The captain cannot be everywhere at once, nor aware of all processes that affect the aircraft at any given time. Furthermore, numerous tasks sometimes need to be accomplished simultaneously. Thus, the captain must be able to effectively delegate authority to different crewmembers at different times, while retaining overall responsibility for the safety of the aircraft and its occupants. This process requires that the captain place trust in the training and the capabilities of the crewmembers that are being delegated tasks. In the context of CRM, the captain should attempt to perform participative leadership, which is a leadership style in which crewmembers are encouraged to be part of the decision-making process while being given full autonomy to accomplish specifically assigned tasks. One of the many challenges faced during the introduc­tion of cockpit resource management was that changing someone's leadership style, much like attempting to change personality, is an extremely difficult undertaking once the style has been firmly in place for some time. The element of participation in leadership deci­sions carries the potential risk of influencing how people perceive the authority of the leader. Flying an aircraft does not employ democracy for decision making! It is highly desirable that a captain be a strong leader, which in the cockpit resource management context is defined as fostering crew participation without diminishing one's perceived authority. Captains are vested by their company and by aviation regulations with the authority to influence others as the designated leaders of their crews. Discussions on the concept of captain's authority are prevalent on professional flight decks across the world. It is quite common these days to hear flight crews bemoaning the perceived erosion of captain's authority, as is illustrated in the first aviation safety report system example later in this chapter. Much of the early culture and processes in aviation were modeled from mari­time history. As such, the concept of deference to a captain's authority originated in the maritime world, where it was discovered long ago that ships could not be governed democratically without catastrophic consequences. Not too long ago, maritime law actually expressed the matter succinctly by stating, "The captain's word is law." Further increasing the sense of an airline captain's authority was the tremendous respect, if not awe, that most people had toward the early pioneers of aviation. As air travel became increasingly safe in the 20th century, the public started losing some of its awe for pilots. As the number of aviators swelled into the tens of thousands and the accident rate dropped dramatically in the 1960s and 1970s, the public sentiment toward pilots shifted. Aviators were no longer seen as minor gods by the general public and, more to the point, by fellow aviation professionals such as ground support personnel and cabin crewmembers. The increasing accessibil­ity of air travel following the 1978 Airline Deregulation Act in the United States caused a further reduction in the perceived prestige of the airline pilot profession. Pilot acceptance of cockpit resource management during the 1980s was hampered, partly, by captains who viewed the movement as an attack on their authority. In the years since the September 2001 terrorist attacks, pilot unions have voiced concern that security measures have further diminished the captain's authority. Security decisions are often made for a flight by government officials without consulting the captain, thus effectively usurping the captain's authority in such matters. Furthermore, the terrorist attacks of the past 15 years have resulted in the continuing requirement for pilots to undergo security screenings, further reducing the appearance that they were special in the eyes of the traveling public. In fact, these days, flight crewmem­bers are occasionally rebuked by passengers for cutting ahead of security screening lines. Such passengers have even been heard to complain that crewmembers should not receive preferential treatment. Captains approaching retirement or those who have retired often reminisce about the esteem that they were afforded and about how the few disagreements that occurred in the bygone era were handled, back in the days when "the captain was king." Any disagreements with ground personnel or flight attendants were dealt with quickly and efficiently, often quite harshly. In many cultures, such respect (or fear) for captain's authority persists to some degree while in others, it is perceived as quickly receding into the annals of history. Regulations are in place to protect the captain’s authority. In the United States, Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) 91.3 (a) states that "the pilot-in-command (PIC) of an aircraft is directly responsible for, and is the final authority to, the operation of that aircraft. " 14 code of federal regulations 121 .535 (d) states that each PIC is, during flight opera­tions, "in command of the aircraft and crew and is responsible for the safety of the passengers, crew members, cargo, and airplane." FAR 121 .557 allows the PIC to take any action considered necessary during emergency situations that require immediate decisions. 14 code of federal regulations 91, 125, and 135, all have similar language empow­ering captains with command authority. Challenges to captain's authority must be met head on, but with respect and politely. The authority provided to leaders must be used with great judgment by soliciting participation from subordinates. Leaders must also remember to never assume malice as someone's motivation for challeng­ing authority when simple ignorance may be involved. Assertiveness. Continuing with our discussion of the central theme of CRM, let us turn our attention to looking at the second component: assertiveness with respect. Assertiveness is defined as "a style of communication in which individuals express their feelings and needs directly" (VandenBos, 2007). In CRM, assertiveness means that a crewmember should know what questions to ask and not be hesitant to ask them. Assertiveness also requires that crew members candidly state opinions about a course of action or planning item and voice concerns immediately. A five-step assertiveness process is often taught to subordinates in order to encourage the captain to act on the crewmember's input. The advocacy of an opinion or of a desired course of action is imperative in the decision-making process, particularly in the highly time-sensitive environment of aviation (Kern, 2001). A climate of mutual respect is the key to the success of interpersonal rela­tionships in life and to completing tasks in any working environment. Given that professional pilots are, by virtue of their office, the end-result of many years of training, that notion alone should warrant a certain level of respect. However in CRM, the reasons for exhibiting respect when interacting with fellow crewmem­bers are not only an appropriate deference to one's commitment to aviation, it also has direct ramifications for safety. It is only by respecting the input of a crewmem­ber that one can expect future input to be provided. For example, a pilot who dismisses the concern of a flight attendant because it seems unfounded may not only be disregarding a key piece of information that affects the flight, but by virtue of the dismissal, may also have made the flight attendant reluctant to voice concerns in the future. Likewise, a crewmember who shows disrespect toward a person in a position of authority can also negatively impact the cockpit resource management process by making the senior member more hesitant to solicit input. PROOF OF cockpit resource management EFFECTIVENESS Although cockpit resource management has evolved through numerous stages since its inception, the basic premise is the notion that very often someone in the sequence of events has the power to intervene and prevent an accident. The external and internal factors that prevent key individuals from taking action to prevent an accident have been the subject of countless studies. We now have a better understanding of some of the key issues that form part of what the aviation industry calls CRM. However, we would be remiss if we did not ask the most fundamental of all questions: does cockpit resource management really work? Some ques­tions can only be answered with time. Now that the cockpit resource management movement has several successful decades behind it, data can be depicted showing the tangible impact that cockpit resource management training has had on the safety of aviation. In most airlines of the Western world today, cockpit resource management skill sets are a core com­ponent of initial and recurrent training curricula. Nevertheless, pilots and the personnel who support them continue to make significant human errors that make it very challenging to further reduce the rate at which accidents happen. It should be noted that no one has proposed that cockpit resource management is a means for eliminating all errors. cockpit resource management is a way to address error, but do we have proof that cockpit resource management actually has increased the level of safety with which we operate aircraft? From the very beginning of the cockpit resource management movement, flight training instructors, curriculum designers, and aviation researchers have sought to find out whether the methodologies they were designing actually were producing a benefit. The desire to quantify whether error management methodologies are effective predate the cockpit resource management movement. Such efforts emerged out of general research in the field of psychology and out of customized studies in aviation human factors. As illustrated in Figure 4-3, national aeronautics and space administration has used human test subjects who are often active airline pilots for simulator studies about CRM. Additional literature materials and citations regarding cockpit resource management theory and practice can be found in the online supplement to this chapter. cockpit resource management PYRAMID MODEL Given the many components of cockpit resource management and the various ways that each compo­nent affects each other, it proves convenient to produce a model of how every­thing works together. The reader may recall the discussion in Chapter 2 of why such models are helpful. As concepts become increasingly complex it is common to resort to models as a way of helping to understand how the concepts interrelate. They help us grasp "the big picture" so we can try to make sense of it all. Also remember the previously mentioned caveat that since models are inherently attempts to simplify, they can sacrifice knowledge of the nuances that are sometimes critical to getting the full picture of all the types of factors involved in an accident. Bearing in mind such limitations of conceptual modeling, a depiction called the cockpit resource management Pyramid model, shown as Figure 4-4, has been created to help the reader interpret and contextualize the contents that are to follow about CRM. The model is in pyramid form as a way to facilitate understanding and illustrate how certain components of cockpit resource management are fundamental building blocks, or prerequisites, for subse­quent models. Let us read the pyramid model from the top-down. Hovering above the model are the two reasons why cockpit resource management is such an important part of commercial aviation. When properly performed cockpit resource management directly leads to the creation and sustainment of safety and efficiency. The terms safety and efficiency are intimately related, in that an accident is the ultimate expression of an inefficient system. Grouping both terms together is also meant to imply that the processes that promote safety can also promote the efficiency of aircraft operation. So, going back to the model, notice that both safety and efficiency are the direct products of Aeronautical Decision Making (ADM), which is the top-most component of the pyramid. ADM refers to how pilots use mental processes to con­sistently determine how best to respond to a given set of circumstances. ADM is only as good as the Shared Situational Awareness (SSA) of the team members who are involved in making the decision. system safety analysis refers to the common perceptions and comprehension of an environment and how they impact the future, as held by two or more people. The accuracy of system safety analysis creates reality and the common mental model of the team members, and therefore, directs their decision making. The system safety analysis is a product of how well a team coordinates its actions, which depends intimately on the verbal and nonverbal communication of members, which explains why the coordination component underlies system safety analysis and why the communication component underlies coordination in the model. The foundation of the model is leadership and followership, since the effectiveness of the interplay between leaders and followers directly impacts the quality of communication that is used to coordinate actions that build system safety analysis for peak ADM. That is how the cockpit resource management Pyramid model works to depict the interrelation of the key components of CRM. Affecting every component of the model is culture, which means the shared values and beliefs of a group of people, often impacted by behav­ioral norms shaped by a nation, profession, and organization. Although the cockpit resource management Pyramid model was just described from top to bottom, the ideal way to study each component is to start with the foundation, leadership, and followership, since the interplay of both set the stage for everything that follows inside of the pyramid, except for culture. The next parts of the chapter cover each component of the model and finish the chapter by describing how culture impacts the overall conduct of CRM. LEADERSHIP AND FOLLOWERSHIP FOR SAFETY Leadership can be explained in many ways. In the context of safety, leadership can be defined as "the process by which an individual influences the behavior and attitudes of others toward a common goal." The role of such influence in commer­cial aviation has a direct bearing on the safety of an operation, but is not always addressed when discussing accident prevention. Followership is as important as leadership and describes the ability to take direction well and to deliver on what is expected of someone by a leader. The cumulative effect of such influences, when taken across the entire employee group, fosters a certain safety culture that sets the expectations for behaviors and attitudes about risk. There are many leaders in commercial aviation, although we focus on the role of the captain given the direct impact that influ­ence yielded by the captain has on the safety of a flight operation. This section commences by discussing the aspects of leadership that impact the cockpit resource management Pyramid model and then flows into the role of followership. Together, the working relationship between leaders and followers sets the tone for the other elements contained within the cockpit resource management Pyramid. Let us start by addressing the common confusion over the difference between management and leadership. Management is the process of "planning, organiz­ing, directing, and controlling" behavior so as to accomplish a given workload by dividing up tasks (Wagner & Hollenbeck, 2005). Most managerial tasks to be completed by flight crews are carefully described in each organization's standard operating procedures (SOPs). Such a situation seems to diminish the necessary managerial actions of a captain but does not address the pressing need for leadership, which is about setting the example for others to follow and consists of designing a system of incentives and disincentives for encouraging the behavior of followers. Leadership revolves primarily around the concept of creating a positive work atmosphere, so the crew effectively manages resources and complies with procedures (Lumpe, 2008). Perhaps the best way to harmonize the differing opinions between "managing" and "leading" is to recognize that commercial aircraft captains must perform both managerial and leadership function as part of their job and that both aspects have a direct impact on safety. Such a dual charge can be described as necessitating an abil­ity to "direct and coordinate the activities of other team members, assess team performance, assign tasks, develop team knowledge, skills, and abilities, motivate team members, plan and organize, and establish a positive atmosphere" (Northouse, 2007). TEN KEY ACTIONS OF CAPABLE SAFETY LEADERS In many ways, the pilot-in-command (PIC) of an aircraft is the chief executive officer (CEO) of the aircraft. Just as a CEO is responsible for the well-being of employees, satisfaction of customers, financial health of a company, and ethical decision making, so too is the PIC (or senior aviation manager) responsible for all that happens when he or she is in command. The following section contains a list of what the authors believe are the top 10 key actions exhibited by capable aviation safety leaders. Although adjustments may have to be made to any list of actions by capable leaders in order to deal with particu­lar circumstances, the list is a useful guide for key actions for all aviation professionals. 1. Set the Stage for Safety Excellence. An effective leader can commence the process of team building by explaining the challenges that will likely be faced and by depicting how open communication and shared input into the decision-making process can overcome those obstacles. 2. Encourage Participation in Authority to Promote Safety. Leaders use the authority that has been given them to influence mission accomplishment while simultaneously encouraging participation. They welcome comments from team members who take pride in mission accomplishment. 3. Strive to Create New Safety Leaders. The training that a leader receives in prepa­ration for upgrade should not just consist of technical aspects of troubleshooting and decision making, but of the leadership aspects as well. Leaders must be able to encourage the development of leadership in their subordinates. 4. Lead by Example to Show Sincere Care for Safety. Leading by example means that leaders should be enthusiastic champions of the mission and should try to motivate their crew to excel in meeting the mission objectives. It also means that those in charge should readily acknowledge their mistakes instead of constantly working to protect personal image or ego. True students of leadership will view unpleasant situations faced by their crewmembers as excellent learning opportu­nities to lead by example. 5. Active Listening. A key means for promoting communication is developing active listening skills. Knowing when and what to communicate means knowing when to listen versus when to speak. It also means actively listening to what others are saying while consciously attempting not to filter or block the message that is being broadcast. 6. Manage Resources and Performance. Another key aspect of leadership is knowing how to distribute and manage workload effectively. The leader must step in to establish what tasks should be done, when the work should be accom­plished, who will perform the tasks, and the expectations for completion. The previous chapter explained the intimate relationship between workload and situational awareness. 7. Take Care of Followers. Leaders take care of those employees under their care. The captain or senior aviation manager should make an effort to consider the special needs and circumstances of each team member. Sincerely caring about subordinates' well-being sends a strong message about mutual accountability and furthers the leader's attempt to build and maintain teamwork. 8. Constantly Work on Building the Team. It is important to make each crew­member feel valued. When major decisions are to be made, the leader should solicit and respect input from everyone. 9. Delegate Authority but Never Responsibility. The leader must delegate suffi­cient authority to members of the crew to perform different tasks while always retaining responsibility for the proper accomplishment of such tasks. It is impossible for a single individual to accomplish all the tasks required in com­plex aviation operations. 10. Be Ethically Courageous. Numerous situations are presented on every flight for a captain's ethical courage to be tested. All too often it is more comfortable to simply allow an untrue statement or unsafe condition to fade into the recesses of memory instead of taking action to prevent a recurrence of the condition in the future. The traits and actions of effective leaders can certainly be discussed but must always be molded to fit the context of a situation. What is an aviation professional to do then in order to become a capable leader? The answer lies in the pursuit of excellence by developing one's personal leadership style. After all, how can one be an authentic leader by trying to emulate someone else? We can certainly learn lessons from other leaders and apply behaviors that we believe are successful, but ultimately, we must create our own authentic leadership style. The 10 safety leader­ship actions portrayed here thus form the core knowledge base for developing one's own style through experience, reflection, and continued study. FIVE KEY AcTIONS OF EFFECTIVE SAFETY FoLLOWERS At this point we must acknowledge that not all subordinates are destined to become leaders. Take the following example into consideration. Some first officers in seniority-based management systems are happy with having accrued sufficient seniority to bid excellent schedules while not being weighed down with the burden of command. Such pilots may spend most of their careers with little ambition to upgrade to the captain's left seat. That having been said, the first officer or other subordinate should be cognizant that he or she is also in a leadership position by virtue of exercising authority when it is delegated. For example, the captain (or other senior aviation manager as appropriate) will delegate the authority of the flight to the first officer while the captain is away from the flight deck. Some argue that listing followership actions separate from leadership actions is unnecessary, since both lists contain similar items. Although such an assertion is certainly true to an extent, there is value in describing the specific actions that seem more germane to followership than to leadership. Most leaders would agree that the items provided below are the key actions of aviation safety followers. 1. Exhibit Assertiveness with Respect. Regardless of what tone has been set by the leader, team members have an ethical obligation to be assertive and to voice concerns and opinions on matters of importance to the safety in aviation. To act assertively is to be honest, direct, and self-confident while respecting others. Workers who are assertive in a disrespectful manner may be tuned-out by leaders and labeled as "troublemakers" who have nothing to contribute. 2. Adopt a Sense of Ownership. It is a professional obligation for employees to act as if they are actual owners of the aircraft being operated and safety representa­tives of the company that provides employment. Such a responsibility is a matter of pride and comes from the realization that each of our actions impacts the bottom line of an operation. 3. Strive for Self-Improvement. One of the key obligations of being a professional is striving for self-improvement. As soon as we settle for "good enough," we psychologically start sliding backwards and our work performance soon follows. Always remember that good is the enemy of great, as the expression goes. 4. Show Respect for Fellow Crewmembers. Showing respect to the other members of the crew is not just a matter of courtesy, it is fundamental to fostering a sense of shared purpose that is the building block for teamwork. This means actively listening for content in what another crewmember is saying, not just "hearing" what is being said. 5. Always Be Dependable. A follower has a key obligation to always be dependable. Employers and leaders need to be able to count on people to fulfill their profes­sional responsibilities and also to complete any tasks that they agree to perform. TRANSCOCKPIT AUTHORITY GRADIENT (TAG) The captain's ability to promote assertive behavior in other crewmembers is directly impacted by the perceived authority gradient that lies between the captain and subordinates. Personal factors such as one's designated crew position, age, experience, proficiency, confidence, gender, depth of voice, reputation, physical size, assertiveness, and similar qualities may help create a perception of which pilot exudes more informal authority in the cockpit. A distinction here is drawn between the formal authority given to a leader and the informal authority that can be pres­ent in any team dynamic. Ideally, a captain will be perceived as having more authority than anyone else in the cockpit. However, a captain who creates the perception of exuding too much or too little authority is a formula for possible cockpit resource management problems. It is the captain's job to know how his or her authority may be perceived by others, to be mind­ful of the perceived gradient between the captain and other crew members, and to take measures to adjust the gradient for optimal communication flow. Because such gradients usually exist between the crewmembers of a given cockpit, the term Transcockpit Authority Gradient (TAG) is used to describe these dynamics. Figure 4-5 depicts the four types of TAG that can be present. The left side portrays TAG-1, which has a gradient too steep for proper authority to be delegated while still being able to keep two-way communication channels open. Such an overly steep positive TAG may develop when a captain is perceived as being a dom­ineering type or when a subordinate lacks confidence or assertiveness. An example of when such a TAG may occur is when an instructor or examiner pilot is paired with a relatively new pilot. Moving to the right in Figure 4-5, TAG-2 shows a flat authority gradient where there is equal or nearly equal perceived authority among both pilots or between two crewmembers. Such a level-playing field sounds quite pleasant but can actually be very dangerous because it may lead to role confusion. Such a situation may exist when two very experienced pilots are paired for a flight, or when two inexperienced pilots are paired with each other. Moving one more depiction to the right in Figure 4-5 shows TAG-3, which is a very dangerous reverse TAG, meaning that the subordinate has more effective authority than the designated leader. It occurs when the captain is still the desig­nated leader but is no longer the functional leader of a crew. When a negative TAG is present, another crew member exerts too much influence on the decisions that are being made. Negative TAGs create very dangerous situations since the individual who is vested with official authority, as recognized by regulations and the operat­ing organization, ceases to be the individual who is exerting authority. An example of such a TAG is when a new first officer happens to be highly experienced in a certain emergency procedure or a specific airfield and the captain starts deferring to the first officer's direction for dealing with the emergency or location. Negative TAGs have led to several notorious accidents, such as the runway collision between a DC-9 and Boeing 727 at Detroit in 1990. Thus, it is a safety concern for aircrew dynamics and aviation professionals to consider. The best authority gradient, where the captain is recognized by all as the decision maker of the crew, but where subordinates feel invited to participate in the decision­making process, is depicted in the light shade of gray by TAG-4 in Figure 4-5. It is a professional responsibility of all crew members to be aware of the TAG and to attempt to manage the TAG. If a captain notices an overly assertive first officer who starts making decisions about the flight unilaterally, action should be taken to reestablish the TAG. Sometimes all that is required to flip a negative TAG back to a positive slope is a gentle reminder by the captain to the crewmember that input is invited, but the decision rests with the captain. Likewise, subordinates must be mindful that their level of confidence and assertiveness should not take away from the captain's need to make decisions. COMMUNICATING FOR SAFETY Effective communication is one of the key features and outputs of properly performed leadership and followership. Although we tend to think of communication mostly in terms of verbal exchanges, other types include the use of writing, nonlin­guistic symbols, gestures, and implied understanding of the actions of others. All such types have numerous pitfalls, but our heavy reliance on verbal communication has made for ingenious developments to attempt to make communication more accurate. This section contains some of the many initiatives that have been developed. Figure 4-6 shows air traffic controllers communicating with each other ver­bally, through written means, and through the use of symbols, plus also speaking with aircraft flight crewmembers and others operating on the airport ramp, such as tug drivers towing aircraft and drivers of airfield vehicles such as fire trucks and wildlife control officials. One of the most known communication techniques for fostering accurate com­munications evident to those listening in the aviation industry is the use of the phonetic alphabet to ensure the proper spelling of different terms, such as navi­gation aids, waypoints, and taxiways. Because spoken sounds can be difficult to discriminate, especially over crackling or congested radio frequencies, British Army signalers commenced using a version of today's phonetic alphabet in the late 19th century. The system has evolved over the years into the system of codes known today, where "A" is phonetically pronounced as "Alpha," "B" as "Bravo," etc. There is still the potential for error in some cases, such as the "Delta" used for the letter "D" given that Delta is also the name of a popular global airline. Most of the world has adopted the use of the 24-hour clock to prevent confusion with the same hours occurring twice a day. Unlike society in the United States and a few other countries where the 12-hour clock prevails and in which am/pm distinctions must be made to clarify whether someone is referring to 8 o'clock in the morning or 8 o'clock in the evening, the 24-hour clock removes the confusion immediately. The 24-hour clock is the international standard put forth by international standard organization 8601 for the exchange of time-related data and is the mainstay of aviation. As such, 8 am becomes 08 :00 or 08'00 hours and 4 pm becomes 16:00 or 16'00 hours. Furthermore, aviation has adopted the use of Coordinated Universal Time, abbreviated as UTC, as the primary time standard for regulating clocks and time. (This is nearly synonymous with Greenwich Mean Time or GMT.) The 24-hour time standard tied to universal coordinated time is an attempt to have a single reference time across all time zones on our planet. When referencing such time it is common for aviation personnel to use the term "Zulu" and to differentiate it from "local" time to pre­vent confusion. For example, a pilot in China speaking with his dispatcher in Paris would refer to "sixteen hundred Zulu" to indicate 4 pm Coordinated Universal Time, so that both the pilot and dispatcher would know precisely what time they are referring to when speaking. Such a means for accurate coordination proves crit­ical not just for discussing takeoff and landing times, but also for reading meteoro­logical observation and forecasts and countless other issues in aviation. Given the vast number of terms used in aviation, emphasis is placed on the use of pre-approved and coordinated standardized phraseology for referring to differ­ent items. The U.S. Aeronautical Information Manual has a 1 1 8-page long glossary of pilot/controller terms precisely for that purpose, although many other uses of standardized phraseology may apply within different companies and even between aircraft makes and models. For example, "TOGA" to a pilot often means "Take Off/Go Around" in reference to a power setting used for certain aircraft operations. Since the English language is the international standard for aviation, certain traps must be discussed that come along with the language and which can be det­rimental to safety. In English the words "to" and "too" and the word "for" and "fore" are used in common speech but unfortunately also sound like the numbers "two" and "four," respectively. Some aviation professionals have intentionally removed those non-numerical words from their speech while at work to reduce confusion with numbers. Thus, instead of a pilot saying, "Leaving one three thousand feet for eight thousand feet" they will replace the word "for" with "descending" and read the same sentence. One of the authors of this book remembers a very confusing exchange when a flight whose weight required the suffix "heavy" to the callsign and which had a number "two" as the last digit of the callsign. The flight's callsign was "452 Heavy." The flight checked in with an en route traffic control center as "Four Five Two Heavy" at an altitude but was interpreted by the controller as being "Four Five too heavy" and therefore the controller thought the flight was too heavy to sustain flight at the altitude. Using the fictitious callsign "Skid 452" as an example, this is how the check-in sounded to the controller: "Denver Center, Skid Four Five Two Heavy Flight Level 350." The controller heard the callsign as "Skid four five" and then misheard "too heavy" for the given flight level, so then quickly issued a lower altitude. The Skid flight descended and later queried the controller as to the descent. When the controller answered that the flight had requested the descent and the flight crew responded, "No we didn't," the situation started getting almost comical. The confusion was finally noticed by the controller who apologized and reissued the previous altitude. One important concept that should be grasped by all aviation professionals to ensure safe operations is the need to close communication loops. The concept entails the notion that a message originates with a sender, is then received and interpreted by, hopefully, the intended recipient, and then the recipient follows up to ensure that the message was appropriately interpreted (Salas, Rosen, Burke, & Goodwin, 2009). The concept forms the cornerstone of the "readback" process used to confirm air traf­fic control clearances but can be used any other time that it is critical to ensure that information has been correctly communicated. For example, when a maintenance controller communicates over radio the steps required to remedy a landing gear mal­function to an aircraft pilot, it proves wise for the pilot to read back the instructions over the radio prior to commencing the remedial action on the flight deck. Given our tendency to not use more words when communicating than neces­sary, particularly when busy or tired, the limiting of information exchanged can actually hamper the communication process. For example, one of the most con­fusing expressions in aviation is, "I got it." The phrase is extremely ambiguous and has caused countless misunderstandings. Given that the phrase's meaning can include that something is understood that a physical object is in one's possession, that something is sighted, or countless other meanings, it is easy to see the source of confusion. Imagine the following exchange on a flight deck, which is not farfetched at all, to illustrate the potential for confusion. A captain is speaking with a jumpseat pas­senger about the new month's duty schedule while the first officer is monitoring the air traffic control frequency. At the same time that the jumpseat passenger asks the captain if he has a copy of next month's duty schedule, the air traffic controller issues a traffic call to the first officer regarding a light aircraft. The first officer then strains her eyes in the direction of the traffic to see if visual contact can be established, but at precisely that same moment the captain answers the jumpseat passenger's question with, "I got it," referring to the duty schedule, and the first officer assumes the captain has the traffic in sight and responds according to the air traffic controller. Moments later, the traffic zooms by a few hundred feet above the flight deck and shocks the first officer, who turns to the captain and states, "I thought you had the traffic in sight! " The captain then answers, "What traffic?" Although this section has focused on initiatives used to ensure verbal com­munication accuracy for safety, numerous other approaches are taken to promote the same in nonverbal communication. For example, some aviation personnel underline the letter "S" when used as part of an alphanumeric sequence in order to prevent confusion with the number "5." For example, AS_5TH685S_. Without the underlined numbers, there is significant potential to misinterpret the alphanumeric notation, especially if it is handwritten by someone else. Similarly, some profession­als chose to slash zeros to differentiate them from the letter " 0 “ and slash sevens to differentiate them from the number " 1," all to prevent confusions in alphanu­meric writing. Also, extensive use of hand signals can occur between ramp person­nel and flight deck crewmembers to communicate different actions when not using headsets for verbal communication, such as connecting external ground power and removing wheel chocks. Such hand signals must be standardized, taught, and enforced in order to ensure clear communications safety. COORDINATING FOR SAFETY Closely related to the concept of communication is coordinating actions that pro­mote safe and efficient commercial flight operations. As part of the cockpit resource management Pyramid model, when proper leadership and followership principles are followed and effi­cient communication is employed, coordination of actions can then lead to shared awareness of a situation and subsequently produce good decisions. Coordination, in this context, means carefully organizing who performs what actions in a com­plex activity to accomplish tasks. Curiously, researchers who have studied high-performance teams in action have determined that they can often coordinate their actions without the need to com­municate in real time because of well-timed and planned previous communication (Cannon-Bowers & Salas, 2001) . Such planned previous communication usually entails briefings, aircraft and automation control, standard callouts, and protocols for working with cabin and external team members. This section focuses on the use of briefings as a key tool for building shared awareness of a situation and features some of the most common briefings that are used in commercial aviation. Whether it is a lead ramp agent briefing a push-back crew before a nonstandard operation or a captain briefing fellow flight deck crewmembers on an approach as is shown in Figure 4-7, briefings are one of the most successful means of coordinating actions and fostering a common mental picture of a situation. As a minimum, every good briefing must have four major components (Zohar & Luria, 2003): 1. Creating a big picture of what is going on 2. Explaining what we want to accomplish 3. Directing the small picture of who will do what 4. Exploring contingencies through if-then problem scenarios Given the complexity of some briefings, many crew members rely on written notecards containing briefing items to ensure that key points are covered. One of the most important flight crew briefings that takes place is the before-flight briefing for the entire crew, including flight attendants, which is sometimes called the "CRM briefing." This briefing is performed by the captain after reviewing preflight planning information and receiving a dispatcher briefing and takes place as early as possible before crewmembers commence their onboard duties. One of the primary purposes of the briefing is setting the tone for the collaborative spirit of the crew. There is an old saying in aviation that warns of consequences for those captains who skip this briefing: "By not setting the tone, you have set the tone." That is why this key event is sometimes called the "CRM briefing." It takes place at the start of every day or every new crew pairing and can be accomplished at different times prior to commencing checklists. It should be briefed by the captain and should strive to accomplish all items that are general to the flight or series of flights that the crew is paired to fly. Some important items in the cockpit resource management briefing may include the following: General introduction of crewmembers (experience level? currency? ) to include meeting the flight attendants, the presence of air marshals, other armed person­nel, and jumpseat passengers (often off-duty pilots or flight attendants) • The openness of the captain to input and the importance of keeping lines of communication open between the cabin and the flight deck • Any mechanical faults present in the aircraft that may affect passengers or cabin operations • Weather conditions that could impact normal operations and passenger service, such as turbulence or destination fog that could necessitate holding or a diver­sion to an alternate airport • Expected passenger loads • En route flight times • Providing everyone the opportunity to ask questions or make comments The captain may brief other pilots on the flight deck of additional items that do not have particular relevance to cabin crewmembers, such as which pilot will control the aircraft on each leg of the trip (which usually implies that the other pilot will operate the radios), emergency procedures such as who will do what during a rejected takeoff, the expected fuel load, pertinent Notices to Airmen (NOTAMs), mechanical issues with the aircraft that affect flight deck operations, and weather information such as the expected need to de-ice and/or anti-ice the aircraft. Other standard coordination through briefings include a takeoff briefing between the pilots, the flight attendants' passenger pre-flight briefing, and the approach briefing between the pilots. Nonstandard briefings may include the pilot communicating key information to the lead flight attendant during an emergency to include whether to expect an evacuation after landing and how much time is available to prepare the cabin for a landing during an airborne emergency. An example of a nonstandard briefing is the flight attendant emergency briefing, which often contains five items. The briefing provides an outline from which to build the flight attendants' situational awareness when there is a serious problem onboard. Once there is a need to explain the emergency plan to the flight attendants, the flight crew should follow the steps and give the briefing in its entirety. If the briefing is completed, the need for extensive further communication between the pilots and the flight attendant will be minimized, which will be a great help given the very high workload that takes place in both the flight deck and the cabin when dealing with inflight emergencies. This will help in many ways. If the attendants have questions that need to be answered due to a weak briefing, the pilots may be con­tinually interrupted during a time of very high workload. This will only cause more time to be wasted, leading to reduced pilot situational awareness, and will keep the pilots away from what they need to be doing. The advice given to captains about this briefing is typi­cally, "give it once; give it well! “Ideally, the captain should be the one performing the briefing, and the lead flight attendant should be the one receiving it. The briefing will usually take place over the intraplane (cockpit-cabin) phone system. The flight attendant emergency briefing has five major steps which encompass all of the major areas that need to be covered: • Definition of the problem • Amount of time available until landing • Whether to have the passengers brace for landing • Whether an evacuation is expected after landing • Any additional instructions, such as which exits should be used during an evacuation The five-point briefing could turn into a lengthy speech; however, this must be avoided. Every aspect of the briefing must be ready prior to giving it to the FA in a quick and clear manner. This will help the items to be easily understood and minimize the possibility of miscommunication. With this done correctly, the flight crew will be free to complete other subsequent tasks with the knowledge that the cabin crew knows what will happen. As when declaring an emergency to air traffic control, pilots should take a moment to query the flight attendant and ensure that he or she is ready to receive the briefing before proceeding with the briefing. This will be a high-stress moment for the flight attendant, who may be under a lot of stress already from normal cabin duties. An example for the entire briefing is provided below. It assumes that the captain is calling the lead flight attendant, named Jim, on the intraplane phone. Jim, this is the captain. We are going to perform an emergency landing due to the passenger with the chest pains that you told me about. Are you ready for my emergency briefing? O.K. then, the problem is the passenger with the chest pain, you have about 15 minutes before we are on the ground in Topeka. The time is now 9:00 local exactly. Is that what your watch shows? There is no need to brace the passengers, and everyone will stay seated until we taxi to the gate. Once at the gate, the emergency medical crew will board through the forward entry door and proceed to the ill passenger while everyone stays seated. I will make an announcement to the passengers over the PA in about five minutes. Do you have any questions? Please roger and repeat the briefing back to me. It will then be up to the lead flight attendant to ensure the other members of the cabin crew know the plan and to provide an update to the passengers, so they too know what is happening. SHARED SITUATIONAL AWARENESS (SSA) The concept of system safety analysis is tricky, in part because fully sharing awareness is not pos­sible. If we consider system safety analysis as several people having the same mental model of something that is happening or will happen, there is no way to achieve such a state with any degree of accuracy because we cannot read minds. However, this section highlights some of the clever means that humans have devised for working toward SSA, knowing that a significantly high level of system safety analysis is usually sufficient to produce solid ADM in the context of flight operations. As explained by Klimoski and Mohammed in 1994, the numerous mental models that coexist among different members of a given team need not be the same but should have sufficient overlap to make it possible to perform a given task. There are many names for the concept of SSA, such as team cognition, shared understanding, and distributed mental model, but essentially all terms describe knowing the factors that impact you and those around you and knowing whether those around you know so that you can actively work to build a common mental model of what is happening and about to happen. Although a few definitions of system safety analysis exist, the one best suited for this book is "the shared perception of factors that affect a flight, the shared understanding of how those factors impact a flight, and the shared projection of future actions based on the shared understanding" (Millward, 2004). The true challenge is hav­ing all members of a team working toward system safety analysis during an entire aviation opera­tion. A commercial airline flight crew may consist of over a dozen people working together for a dozen hours. It can prove very challenging to think about each other and be cognizant of the need to share information with each other so that system safety analysis is retained over that much time. As explained by Cannon-Bowers and Salas in 1 998, system safety analysis "allows team mem­bers to predict the needs of the task and anticipate the actions of other team mem­bers in order to adjust their behavior accordingly. In other words, team members appear to form expectations of what is likely to happen" (p. 28). system safety analysis will con­stantly change as the individual situational awareness of each team member changes and as differ­ent communication is performed to coordination activities. At any given moment among a group of people, each individual will have their own situational awareness that is a dynamic picture of the situation in their minds and which has a direct impact on the overall system safety analysis of the team. As the situational awareness of one team member drifts away in terms of accuracy, it can cause the entire system safety analysis to shift. In addition to individual levels of situational awareness, other factors that foster system safety analysis include shared training experiences, pre-event briefings, post-event debriefings, strong verbal communication skills, standardized phraseology, predetermined roles for high-workload moments, and physical proximity to pick up visual cues that airport information desk communication (Zohar & Luria, 2003). When pilots and flight attendants train together by running through a cabin evacuation in a full-scale cabin mockup, they learn to see situations through the eyes of each other, and thus understand their concerns and possible thoughts about a given task. Post-event debriefings, such as when air traffic controllers analyze a loss-of­separation event, can greatly build future system safety analysis in a way similar to training together, by learning the considerations that were present in the mind of a colleague during an event. The many briefings used in commercial flight operations, such as between dispatchers and flight crews, pilots and flight attendants, and flight attendants and passengers, build system safety analysis quickly by communicating the status of different items and the actions that may have to take place during both normal and emergency situations. In similar fashion, having predetermined crew roles during high-workload moments sets basic expectations of behavior. For example, each crewmember is taught very specific actions to accomplish during a rapid decompression of an aircraft cabin. During such an event there is just not enough time to communicate and coordinate the required actions to build SSA, so the system safety analysis is built beforehand through predetermined responsibilities. Those responsibilities are often contained in standard operating procedures as previously noted. A good example of how factors impact system safety analysis that most can relate to is the distraction of speaking on a cell phone while driving. A reason why speaking on cell phones while driving a car is more dangerous than speaking with someone riding in a car is because the driver has less system safety analysis with the caller than with the rider. For example, the caller will not know that the driver is performing a tricky merge onto thick traffic on the highway and may chose that precise moment to ask a question such as, "Did you think the proposal we pitched at the presentation was properly supported with examples? " While a rider in the same car with system safety analysis may wisely chose to wait until the car has properly integrated into the traffic flow before asking the question. That is one reason why having "hands free" cell phone capabilities in cars does not fully reduce the element of distraction and is not the same as simply speaking with someone in a car. One of the most important concepts to learn is that the possibility to enhance system safety analysis exists whenever someone knows something that other crewmembers don't, as long as the information is shared at the proper time with colleagues (Millward, 2004). That same year, Millward also produced a handy guide to building system safety analysis via the "STUFF" acronym: S-Share information without being asked and do so often T-Try multiple communication strategies to ensure you are understood a shared vocabulary F-Frequently confirm the group goal and your role in achieving it F-Forecast the needs and actions of others and adapt your behavior accordingly Another key concept is that whenever confusion arises that shows that system safety analysis may be damaged, team members should attempt to communicate along all three levels of the situational awareness spectrum, namely, perception, understanding, and projection (Endsley, 2008). For example, imagine an air traffic control supervisor who asks one of his tower controllers, "What is United doing? “ That is a request to receive informa­tion about the actions of traffic to help build a common picture between two controllers. The other controller may answer, "He's almost there." You can see how such a communication exchange does very little to build SSA, in part because the exchange is composed of highly ambiguous statements that could have many meanings. The supervisor may have been trying to ask why a United Boeing 737 was not on the standard taxiway leading up to a runway for departure, but the other controller may have thought the supervisor was asking about why a differ­ent United flight that was on another taxiway and holding short of the runway had not been cleared for takeoff yet and answered accordingly. As previously men­tioned, to maximize SSA, the communication exchange could have occurred across all three levels of situational awareness. Doing so may have produced the following exchange: the supervisor would have asked, "The United-on taxiway Charlie (perception) is not on a standard route (understanding), where is he going {projection)? “ The other controller would then know precisely how to answer the question so as to share awareness by saying, "He's waiting to cross the active runway and taxi to the hangar for maintenance." AERONAUTICAL DECISION MAKING (ADM) The key products of cockpit resource management and TEM lead to ADM, which can be explained as a mental, systematic approach for determining the best solution to a given situation. Despite continuous improvements in technology for flight safety, the human factor that leads to errors still remains. Understanding ADM also explains how personal attitudes can affect decision making and how those attitudes can be adapted to improve safety in the flight deck. As the cockpit resource management Pyramid model describes, the optimal environment for ADM starts with good leadership and followership that engenders effective and appropriate communication between seniors and subordinates. When this type of communica­tion has been established, this leads to coordination between everyone involved, which produces SSA. This in turn leads to the environment which produces the best ADM. Additionally, culture greatly impacts the atmosphere for good ADM. It impacts how leaders and followers communicate and interact with each other. federal aviation administration Advisory Circular (AC) 60-22 explains ADM as a systematic mental process used by those involved in aviation to consistently determine the best course of action for a given situation. THE IMPACT OF CULTURE Over the past few decades there has been increased scrutiny of the role played by culture in teamwork. Culture has been defined as the " Shared values (what is important) and beliefs (how things work) that interact with an organization's structure and control systems to produce behavioral norms (the way we do things around here)" (Reason, 1 998, p. 294). Culture should be examined at a deep level to see how it can impact everyday commercial aviation operations. In addition to the influences of an employee's sense of culture on safety directly through perceptions of acceptable risk, we should also consider the impact that cross-cultural groups of employees have on safety when they interact with each other (Dong & Liu, 2010). When speaking of pilots and flight attendants, it has been determined that three cultures primarily impact their shared values: the national culture of each individual crewmember, the professional culture of each employee group, and the organizational culture at their place of work. Each of these three cultures impacts the safety of a flight both posi­tively and negatively (Metscher, Smith, & Alghamdi, 2009). National culture comprises the attitudes, behaviors, and values as a function of heritage (Helmreich, Merritt, & Wilhelm, 1999). National cultures create values associated with individualism versus collectivism, masculinity versus femininity, and power distance; all of which certainly affect the interplay between members of a team. The dimension of individualism versus collectivism within national culture imprints people with a level of concern for their own interest versus the collective interest of a society and sets the stage for how one sees themselves as a member of a team (Hofstede, Hofstede, & Minkov, 2010). The national culture dimension of masculinity versus femininity refers to attributes that are valued regarding traits traditionally associated with gender, where masculine societies are generally more assertive, competitive, and reward-oriented, whereas feminine societies have indi­viduals who are generally more modest, caring, and cooperative (Strauch, 2010). Power distance is a cultural measure of hierarchical degrees in society, meaning how lower ranked individuals accept the power of those perceived to be above them (Hofstede et al., 2010). Figure 4-8 shows a commercial airline flight crew operating an MD-82 for Zagros Airlines, which is an Iranian company founded in 2005. Think of the com­ponents of the cockpit resource management Pyramid model and of the different ways in which national culture impacts shared values, as explained in this section, then contemplate how the national culture of Iran, or that of any country, impacts how cockpit resource management is conducted. Each employee group is influenced by the culture of their profession. When we speak of a professional culture we refer to the traits and values common to a given profession that distinguish it from other employee groups. Just look at the differ­ent employee groups at any given organization, and aspects of their culture will start becoming evident. In commercial aviation the wings that pilots wear pinned on their uniforms pay homage to a rich heritage of adventure and technical prowess stemming back over a century. The piloting profession has long valued resolute decision making, technical know-how, education, and rigorous training as traits that set them apart from other employee groups, and pilots therefore have devel­oped significant self-esteem and pride. Unfortunately for pilots, negative aspects can also be associated with these values, such as a false sense of invulnerability that worked against adopting the principles of cockpit resource management when they were introduced and which still make some feel impervious to the effects of fatigue, and refusals of assistance offered by other employee groups (Helmreich, Wilhelm, Klinect, & Merritt, 2001). Organizational culture refers to the traits and values common to the members of one company, or airline in our case, that sets them apart from other airlines. Although other cultural differences, such as the ones described in this section, cer­tainly influence the values of members of an organization, each airline will also infuse beliefs, norms, and attitudes into its members (Wise, Hopkin, & Garland, 2010). For example, some airlines promote fun and low-cost travel as values that penetrate into the mindset of employee groups as evidenced by humorous ties, optional hat-wearing policies, leather jackets, and laid-back attitudes, whereas other airlines are more formal, as evidenced by double-breasted uniform jackets, strict hat-wearing policies, and no-nonsense attitudes toward accomplishing tasks. Organizational culture impacts the safety performance of an airline by shap­ing how employees perceive the importance of risk detection and management (Hayward, 1 997). One critical expression of organizational culture is the common values held toward risk, known as safety culture. Safety culture became a hot topic among accident investigators in 1979 with the controlled flight into terrain in the State of Maine of a de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter operating as Down East Airlines flight 46. In 1991 the national transportation safety board started publicly showcasing the role of safety culture when it discussed the maintenance operations of an Embraer EMB 120 Brasilia operating as Continental Express flight 2574 that crashed in Texas following the sudden in-flight loss of the left horizontal stabilizer's leading edge. Since that accident, there have been a steep increase in mentions of safety culture by air­lines and investigators. Safety culture remains a key influence on all components of the cockpit resource management Pyramid model. CASE STUDY: JETBLUE FLIGHT 292 An excellent example of how properly used cockpit resource management can produce a human victory in aviation was seen by the actions of an Airbus 320 flight crew, operating JetBlue Airlines Flight 292, in September 2005. The crew encountered an unsafe gear warning on a flight from Burbank, California to New York City. When the captain raised the landing gear lever after takeoff, several error mes­sages were displayed that indicated a problem with the nose-gear shock absorber or steering mechanism. The First Officer continued flying the aircraft in the vicin­ity while the Captain commenced troubleshooting. Given the indications that were noted, the flight manual cautioned that it was possible the condition indicated a nose gear that was cocked at a 90-degree angle to the fuselage. The nose gear of the aircraft was not visible from the flight deck, and no means existed to directly determine the angle of the nose gear from the flight deck. Extensive troubleshooting and coordination ensued to determine the exact nature of the malfunction. It involved close coordination with a host of people outside the aircraft, such as JetBlue maintenance controllers, dispatchers, and tower controllers. In addition to the required troubleshooting tasks, the crew also had to coordinate closely with the flight attendants and passengers; particularly given that some of the passengers were watching the event unfold via live television coverage on the JetBlue seatback entertainment systems. The crew decided to perform a low alti­tude flyby of the control tower at Long Beach to assess the status of their nose gear. As the flight descended and performed the flyby, JetBlue personnel at the Long Beach Airport went outside of their buildings to watch and even a local news helicopter took a peek at the gear's position. The tower controllers, JetBlue personnel, and the helicopter pilot all agreed that the nose gear was in fact cocked at a 90-degree angle. FIGURE 4-9 The dramatic landing of JetBlue flight 292. (Source: Wikimedia Commons) With the new information at hand, the crew decided to divert to Los Angeles and started discussing the implications of landing with a cocked nose gear. Just prior to touchdown, the captain directed the flight attendants and pas­sengers to brace. As the aircraft slowed to a stop, the tower controller called the captain and informed him that no fire was visible. The captain then used that observa­tion and contacted the cabin crew, advising that the passengers would be deplaned by using an airstairs instead of the emerging evacuation slides. Figure 4-9 shows the landing of JetBlue flight 292 at Los Angeles International Airport with a cocked nose gear that created sparks as it was drug along the runway during the landing rollout. The pilots of Flight 292 must be commended for their methodical application of cockpit resource management to cope with a very undesirable situation. Although most air transport pilots would agree that a cocked nose gear is usually not catastrophic, a history of aviation accidents has proved on numerous occasions that seemingly minor mal­functions can result in major accidents when not properly handled by the crew. As can be seen in this example, effective aviation cockpit resource management is composed of a multitude of knowledge areas, ranging from communication processes and problem solving, to group dynamics and workload management. The accuracy of decisions made by pilots during routine flight conditions and during emergencies stems directly from the quality of the information that those decisions are based on. How a pilot goes about flying the aircraft while gathering and using useful information is the crux of what cockpit resource management is all about. aviation safety report system EXAMPLES Following are two case study examples from NASA's Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), in the original text submitted, including grammatical errors. The reader will see traces to the different components of individual human perfor­mance, professionalism, and the components of the cockpit resource management Pyramid model. Finally we will consider the case of a solid cockpit resource management positive example in the case of JetBlue Flight 292. RAMP OPERATIONs: Example Of Disregard For Authority Title: Lack of regard for the authority of the captain by ramp personnel. On gate and time for push back, the push crew said that they would take the brakes and hold the push awaiting for clrnc from ramp. There was an aircraft behind us so the wait was extended. Without prior coordination, the forward cargo door opened and bags were loaded. I asked the tug driver who had given clrnc for the pit to be opened. He said that we were just sitting there and he had told the rampers to throw the bags into the pit. I reminded him that the capt was the one who gave permission to open the doors after the brakes have been released. This opening the doors without coordination has become common with the rampers. The tug driver then stated that they could do this if we were waiting for clrnc. I then said, 'not without talking to the crew.' He then said, 'so write it up.' I then stated that he should read up on the procs. At this point we had been given permission to push and I informed the tug driver. He started the push by pumping the accelerator on the tug and bunching the tow bar against the nose gear several times. At least four times. I then directed him to stop the push, without a response at first. I had concern for the aircraft nose gear and for the flt attendants standing in the aisle doing their demos. Only after the second command to stop the push did the tug driver stop. Not wanting him to continue the bumping of the aircraft and realizing that he was mad at me, I directed a return to the gate and then directed for another push crew. We informed ramp of the problem and informed coordination ctl. The coordination ctlr was of no help in the sit and became very unprofessional and abusive to the crew insisting that the push crew was qualified to do the push and thus should be allowed to do it. She stated that we were being very unprofessional for keeping the passenger waiting and that we should accept the push crew and go. The coordination ctlr made these statements without knowing what was going on. The ramp lead got on the headset and informed me that I had 'no right' to request another crew. I informed him that I had every right to protect the aircraft and the crew and that I would not accept an individual who takes his irritation out on the acft. He informed me that it would be five to ten minutes before they could get another crew, and I said fine. Soon after, the ramp supervisor arrived and had the jet bridge pulled back, and we discussed the sit. He said that he would look into the prob and requested a rpt be filed. I told him I would file the rpt and forward it to him. We pushed back with the new crew and departed. Ramp personnel opening the cargo doors without clrnc from the flt crew, tug drivers not using the proper terminology, or improper pushes have become a problem. Intentionally taking frustration out on an aircraft cannot be accepted. Discussion question for the reader: How can an airline encourage the concept of professionalism known as empowered accountability among employees who are paid minimum wage or close to minimum wage? FLIGHT CREW Example Of Steep Transcockpit Authority Gradient Have flown with this capt on 1 previous trip. He tends to be critical, thus on a subconscious level, I may not be offering him the backup that he needs. We were clred to hold as published at the gared intxn,!-hand turns. The capt has a bad habit of mak ing pa's without warning me, which would give me a chance to put on my headset. Just as he begins a pa (rather than paying attn to flying or giving me the airplane) the aircraft enters a r-hand turn at the fix. I was looking at the flt plan to see how much holding fuel we had, I did not catch the error and as the aircraft flew away from the fix on the wrong side of the holding pattern, the ctlr gave us a vector. I queried the ctlr and she said it was because we entered the pattern incorrectly, at which time I immediately made the correction. A few seconds later the ctlr clred us direct to gared intxn to pick up the remainder of the korry 3 arr. Even though I emphasized to this cap that the pattern had! -hand turns, I did not catch the fact that he had it entered incorrectly in the first place. There is no excuse for me m issing his turn, even though, his critical nature tends to make me stand off and not offer him as much . This I have realized after reflecting on this event. The same cap t on the next leg criticized me in the presence of a chief pit on the jumpseat for briefing an obstacle, a large radio twr, on a visual apch. The list goes on. When treated like a second-class citizen, perhaps my own performance became second class. Fatigue may have been a factor as well. Discussion question for the reader: The submitting pilot writes, "When treated like a second-class citizen, perhaps my own performance became second class." What could the first officer have done differently to prevent this incident? CONCLUSION This chapter has explored the relationship of teamwork to safety and how team­work in commercial aviation depends intimately on the commitment of each indi­vidual to being properly trained, experienced, proficient, and fit for the duties of his or her position. An airline sets the stage for these conditions to be met, but each individual employee must have the professionalism to do his or her part to ensure readiness to deal with both normal challenges and unexpected contingencies. Each employee should feel both empowered and accountable for the safety of a flight operation. In order to extract the maximum benefit of teamwork for promoting safety, cockpit resource management has evolved through numerous stages of development to produce a central theme of encouraging participation in the authority provided to leaders and of promoting subordinate assertiveness with respect. The cockpit resource management Pyramid model provides insights into teamwork to learn how leadership and followership use com­munication and coordination techniques to share awareness of a situation so that optimal decisions can be made. Those decisions directly impact the safety of flight operations, and all components of the pyramid are under the influence of culture. Today, cockpit resource management and the related notion of Threat and Error Management stand as best practices for team members working together to prevent accidents and maximize the efficiency of operating aircraft. The takeaway of this chapter is that humans, when properly used in a team setting, can actually add more value to safety than they detract due to their innate tendencies to err as human beings. So now the reader knows the answer to the question posed earlier in the chapter: if we all make mistakes, then what is the advantage of having two pilots over one pilot on the flight deck of a commercial airliner? The advantage is that a team, when properly cockpit resource management trained and fit for duty, will catch many more errors than the combined sum that they produce, hence adding greatly to the safety value chain in commercial aviation safety. KEY TERMS “STUFF" Acronym Advanced Qualification Program (AQP) Aerobic Activity Aeronautical Decision Making (ADM) Approach Briefing Assertiveness with Respect Authority with Participation Cockpit Resource Management Communication Controlled Flight into Terrain (CFIT) Coordination Crew Resource Management (CRM) cockpit resource management Briefing Culture Empowered Accountability False Expectancy Fatigue Fatigue Risk Management Systems (FRMS) Flight Attendant Emergency Briefing Influence Just Culture Leadership and Followership Line-Oriented Flight Training (LOFT) Liveware National Culture Organizational Culture Passenger Pre-Flight Briefing Pilot-in-Command (PIC) Post-Event Debriefing Power Distance Predetermined Crew Roles Professional Culture Safety Culture Shared Situational Awareness (SSA) Takeoff Briefing Threat and Error Management (TEM) REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. In your own words, explain how professionalism impacts safety. 2. What are the major components of Crew Resource Management? 3. Do you think you can have strong Threat and Error Management without good Crew Resources Management? Why or why not? 4. Provide a personal definition of leadership and showcase a specific example of when your personal leadership was successful. 5. Choose a role model for the type of leadership that an aviation professional should exhibit. The person can be a real individual or a fictional character from a book or movie. Explain why he or she depicts the desired leadership traits to ensure safe flight operations as an aviation professional. 6. Explain the four types of Transcockpit Authority Gradients (TAGs). 7. Explain specific actions that a captain can take to reduce the effects of a steep positive authority gradient in order to promote assertive communication from the first officer. 8. Which follower action do you think is most critical for the aviation industry? 9. Would you prefer to be a leader or a follower in the aviation industry? Explain the reasons for your decision. 10. Take the Hazardous Attitude Inventory contained in Chapter 2 of federal aviation administration AC60-22 and determine which are your most hazardous attitudes and potential antidotes for these attitudes. 11. Explain three examples of good cockpit resource management exposed in the JetBlue 292 Case Study.