Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The Report of the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process. March 2002 US Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration March 14, 2002 Federal Aviation Administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification 800 Independence Avenue, S.W.Washington, DC 20591 Aviation Safety Data Management Numerous interviews with federal aviation administration data management personnel were conducted. Because of the CPS one-year charter time constraint, the focus was on federal aviation administration data management programs only, rather than on those of the entire industry. Finding 5 illustrates the primary federal aviation administration data management issue: there are too many independent programs without effective inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Each program is resource limited, and when asked if programs were focusing on identifying accident precursor events, the answer was generally no. Findings 6 and 7 address data definition and reporting requirements and the need for effective data management methodologies and tools. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO), or an equivalent organization, should coordinate the various federal aviation administration data management program activities. The following publications define the FAA’s data management and information technology (IT) programs: • federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, federal aviation administration Data Management (June 20, 2001)• federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy (September 21,1999) • federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy, (September 22, 1999) These publications are significant and should be implemented promptly before technical or philosophical obsolescence becomes an issue. The FAA’s efforts run the risk of falling into the trap noted in federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy: There is general agreement that the federal aviation administration should implement a corporate data management program, but few public or private organizations have successfully done so. Most efforts fail because they are too broad in scope, lack commitment, and grossly underestimate resource requirements.Improving Aircraft Safety (The Low Report)[1] identified these same findings over 20 years ago, and they are still relevant today. Finding 5 Multiple FAA-sponsored data collection and analysis programs exist without adequate inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Coordination of Data Management Systems Effective data management requires clearly defined lines of business (LOBs) that provide customers with meaningful and timely products to maintain and improve commercial air safety. The complexity and scope of these efforts requires effective program management from the highest levels of the federal aviation administration to the field stations. Anything less than a fully integrated and coordinated management structure runs the risk of inefficient resource use and the possibility that intervention opportunities to prevent accidents will be missed. The following federal aviation administration data collection and analysis programs (see Glossary for additional defintions) were reviewed either in person or by teleconference:• Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP)• Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS)• Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP)• federal aviation administration Chief Information Office (AIO)• Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA)• Global Aviation Information Network (GAIN)• National Aviation Safety Data Analysis Center (NASDAC) • Program Tracking and Reporting System (PTRS)• Safety Performance Analysis System (SPAS)• Service Difficulty Reports (SDR) Several private and industry aviation safety database programs were discussed, but time constraints prevented a thorough enough analysis for the team to arrive at meaningful results or conclusions. For this reason, it was decided to focus on programs with direct federal aviation administration involvement. A fundamental federal aviation administration objective is the use of information and knowledge to improve air safety and prevent accidents. This objective led to the creation of numerous federal aviation administration data programs to collect and analyze aviation safety data. The primary focus of data collection programs (e.g., the various data collections for which NASDAC provides a user interface) is on data format and metadata collection. Data analysis efforts (e.g., SPAS), hampered by a lack of quality data, spend an inordinate amount of resources on data collection and integrity. Consequently, data collection and data analysis program activities overlap, hindering data analysis and the creation of meaningful products to enhance aviation safety. A data management objective of “improving air safety” is probably too broad and might be better served if it focused on “creation of products and processes to effectively identify accident precursors and implement intervention techniques.” Data identity and retrieval information (metadata) is crucial, and the existing data provide limited ability to uniquely identify events. For example, data regarding a rejected takeoff (RTO) by an Airbus A340 may be submitted as a rejected takeoff, aborted takeoff, or RTO. The aircraft type may be listed as an A340, Airbus 340, or Airbus A340. On a wide-body aircraft with a flight crew of ten, if every crew member submits an ASAP or aviation safety report system report sing slightly different phraseology, this single event will be registered in the databases as ten different events. This inability to standardize data collection formats reduces confidence in the data itself and is an impediment to using the data for analysis, conclusions, and identifying accident precursors using data mining techniques. The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO) is mandated to accomplish federal aviation administration data management objectives as prescribed in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [2]: The Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer (AIO-1) is esignated as the focal point and has overall responsibility for the federal aviation administration Data Management Program. However, there is limited coordination between AIO and the other federal aviation administration offices that maintain aviation safety databases and analytical tools such as NASDAC, ASAP, FOQA, and SPAS. The need for effective oversight is outlined in the federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy [3]: As with many large public and private organizations, the FAA’s information systems have evolved over the past 20 to 30 years to meet specific requirements. This has led to a proliferation of data, much of which is redundant or obsolete. As a result, federal aviation administration data is difficult to share, costly to assemble, and hard to assess in terms of integrity and accuracy. At the same time, there is an increasing need to share information externally with domestic air carriers, international civil aviation administrations, Congress, and the flying public. There is general agreement that the federal aviation administration should implement a corporate data management program, but few public or private organizations have successfully done so. Most efforts fail because they are too broad in scope, lack commitment, and grossly underestimate resource requirements. The federal aviation administration data management program, therefore, needs to be narrowly focused on the areas with the greatest potential benefits for the agency. The process should be evolutionary with emphasis on collaboration where it makes sense, standardization on core data elements, better communication along the information chain, and discrete projects that address the areas of greatest need. The lines-of-business (LOBs) will work with the Assistant Administrator for Information Services and Chief Information Officer (AIO) to implement this Data Management Strategy and subsequent program. Lack of federal aviation administration data management coordination can be traced in part to the current state of organizational autonomous authority that does not foster a spirit of inter-departmental coordination. This lack of coordination results in a proliferation of fragmented individual data management programs and unnecessary duplication of effort.Enhancing federal aviation administration oversight and a willingness on the part of the federal aviation administration offices to cooperate with each other would improve the effectiveness of existing data management programs by• streamlining resource utilization• reducing duplication of effort • enabling prompt product(s) development and delivery. Other data collection and analysis programs could provide additional safety data and product synergies with federal aviation administration programs:• National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)• Department of Defense (DoD)• International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)• Flight Safety Foundation (FSF)• American Aviation Safety Information System (AASIS)• British Airways Safety Information System (BASIS)• AirClaims • International Air Transport Association (IATA)• Boeing• Airbus• Component manufacturers Overlapping objectives, activities, and limited resources indicate federal aviation administration data programs are not coordinated (stovepiped). There is minimal intra-FAA data management program coordination and no clearly defined office responsible for coordinating these activities. Significant effort is underway to improve the quality of aviation safety data identification and collection. Implementing an oversight function in accordance with federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, Data Management [2[; federal aviation administration Data Management Strategy [3]; and federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [4], would permit the federal aviation administration to streamline resources and programs and expand program capabilities. Finding 6 Basic data definition and reporting requirements are poorly defined relative to the needs of analysts and other users. Data Definition and Reporting Requirements Quality data are fundamental for meaningful and effective analyses. Data directly influence the effectiveness of the decisions and actions taken to improve safety, not just by the FAA, but also by regulators, operators, manufacturers, and supporting industries. Poor quality data also hamper the ability to identify accident precursors. Reporting requirements, e.g., 14 code of federal regulations §21.3 and 14 code of federal regulations §121.703 – 705, alone are insufficient because: • Mandatory data reporting requirements do not always ensure that adequate or relevant data are collected to reliably identify accident precursor events. Frequently, data are required to be reported only after an accident occurs, which may help explain the preceding accident, but fails to collect the data necessary to identify precursors and help prevent another, possibly different, type of accident. • Data collection requirements do not adequately consider the resource constraints within the federal aviation administration and the user community and industry. Data are frequently collected and submitted without a clear understanding of the purpose for the submission and with no relevant feedback to the organization making the submission. • Data are being defined and collected without a clear understanding of who the customers are, what analysis tools are available to mine the data, and what end product(s) the data must serve. Voluntarily reported data (e.g., ASAP, FOQA), while excellent resources, are not always sufficient, reliable, or available to those who need them. Data suppliers may elect not to contribute data out of fear of negative publicity, legal liability, or regulatory enforcement action. It is imperative that data suppliers be provided robust legal and enforcement immunities and incentives to provide data voluntarily (see Finding 9). A lot of data are collected on component reliability and failure patterns and rates, but there is also a need to capture lessons learned from the human/machine interface. Flight crews and maintenance personnel interface increasingly with the aircraft through computer systems. Knowledge of, and proficiency with, these computer systems is an increasingly more important part of flight crew and maintenance training and line operations. Human factors issues regarding these interfaces should be captured for analysis and fed back to the aircraft and systems manufacturers. In many flight crew operating manuals, the flight management computer section is thicker than those relating to engine, electrical, hydraulic, and flight controls—a significant change from aircraft manufactured 20 years ago. radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 [5] addressed this issue: User feedback, especially regarding errors encountered in the use of new equipment or procedures, is heavily stifled because of fear of retribution or other adverse consequences. Without early and comprehensive user feedback, safety suffers, at least in the inability to identify and correct problems detected through minor incidents, which could have more serious safety related consequences. Data may also be skewed based on a unique operating environment. For example, operations in harsh desert or arctic climates might skew the data and any analyses or conclusions from it. A cross sampling of data from multiple operators is needed to ensure the fidelity of the analyses and any conclusions or recommended actions. Data are being collected in non-standardized formats and stored in multiple, often incompatible, databases. Analysis tools are usually incompatible and narrowly focused on a specific objective or product. As a result, resources are expended on multiple projects and produce separate, yet essentially equivalent products. As a result of multiple unique data collection programs, associated products may not serve the aviation safety needs of government and industry. This further isolates users into unique programs to meet specific needs and perpetuates the problem of stovepiping and database proliferation. Users supporting too many individual database programs are less inclined or able (because of time constraints) to support more broad-based programs. Data definition and collection, as part of an integrated data management program, are noted in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [6]: The guiding principles below represent the vision for the federal aviation administration data management program:•Data is viewed as a corporate resource used to make informed business decisions.•Data is available in a timely, easily accessible, and understandable format to all users who need it.•Core data is standardized for increased interoperability and increased accuracy.•Maintenance and development costs are reduced by eliminating redundant and obsolete data, and through data reuse.•Data development is coordinated across LOBs using a standardized methodology.•Data is managed throughout its life cycle from creation to disposition.•AIO is the focal point for corporate data management activities.The primary goal of the federal aviation administration data management program is to make reliable information available quickly.Figure 5 shows some of the formal and informal information flows among regulators, carriers, and manufacturers. Finding 7 There is no widely accepted process for analyzing service data or events to identify potential accident precursors. Identification of Accident Precursors Identification of Accident Precursors Existing data analysis programs are seldom effective at identifying precursors with accident potential. Some non-regulatory processes used by OEMs and airlines are somewhat effective and could be standardized throughout the industry. Some accidents have precursor incidents that indicated that the actual failure mode, or a similar event, had been experienced at least once prior to the accident. For example, the engine failure on a National Airlines DC-10 [7] was preceded by two similar events on engine test cells.i In another example, a Turkish Airways DC-10 cargo door [8] failed in a similar manner to an American Airlines DC-10 [9]. The reporting processes used by the airlines to alert manufacturers and the federal aviation administration to in-service events can provide a source of information to search for precursor events. The difficulty is that a precursor event is just another report among many until a post-accident data search finds it. Some OEMs and airlines, in conjunction with the FAA, have developed processes to seek out precursor events and to evaluate the probability of an accident occurring. Integrated federal aviation administration and industry safety data management systems should:• Effectively identify accident precursors• Provide regulators, operators, and manufacturers information to improve design and operational practices of new and in-service airplanes The office of the federal aviation administration Chief Information Officer (AIO) is mandated to accomplish federal aviation administration data management objectives as prescribed in federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C [10]as follows: •Emphasizes data management as anessential agency program with data being an enterprise resource.•Establishes a comprehensive, corporate Data Management Program rather than strictly data standardization.•Establishes responsibilities for data management within each line of business (LOB) and staff office (SO).•Establishes the key infrastructure necessary to support the Data Management Program. The federal aviation administration is a data-driven organization. The FAA's Data Management Strategy [11], outlines the agency’s approach for the efficient and effective management of data. This order establishes the concepts of the data management strategy as an on-going program for the management of federal aviation administration data. This order also supports the information goal of the federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [12], which is to make reliable information available quickly. Both of these strategies identify data management as essential to the long-term performance of the FAA’s mission and functions and the successful implementation of key initiatives to modernize the National Airspace System (NAS) and improve safety, security, and administrative information systems. The effectiveness of existing federal aviation administration data management programs could be enhanced by: • A better understanding of air transport operations by federal aviation administration data management offices that would improve their ability to provide meaningful safety data information and analyses to their customers. These customers can be either internal to the federal aviation administration or outside in industry. • Educating federal aviation administration and industry users on these organizations’ capabilities, products, or services could lead to federal aviation administration data management programs being better appreciated or understood by potential federal aviation administration and industry customers. Multiple programs proliferate (FAA and industry) that rely solely on the individual user’s data. Stovepiping is also an issue within organizations. For example, maintenance data are often analyzed with maintenance software, and operations data are analyzed by operations software. Hiring sufficient personnel with unique or specific data management knowledge and skills is critical. The skills required to identify precursor data or events are difficult to train and frequently must be augmented by technical support from OEMs, operators, or maintenance personnel. To avoid over-reliance on outside agencies for technical competency, federal aviation administration data management offices must recruit, train, and maintain personnel with requisite technical expertise and skills as noted in federal aviation administration Information Technology Strategy [12]: People: Acquire and maintain critical IT knowledge, skills, and abilities. The aviation paradigm and information technology are changing so rapidly that keeping the workforce technologically current is daunting. Today, many federal aviation administration efforts focus on recruiting, retaining, and training its IT staff, but there is no consensus within the agency as to which are the most important IT knowledge, skills, and abilities, and no corporate program to acquire and develop people with those skills. Over the next three years, that consensus will be built, and programs put in place to acquire and develop people with critical IT knowledge, skills, and abilities, and to maintain those capabilities. While the challenges of creating a data management program to identify accident precursors appear daunting, there are a few existing programs that are effectively doing just that: • The engine OEM/FAA Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies (CAAM), • FAA/Boeing Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) • The airline/FAA Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP)• Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) All of these programs involve specialists reviewing incident reports for potential safety events, e.g., chafed wiring, sticking controls, operational difficulty with avionics, or operating procedures, and recognizing that an accident could have occurred if events had been just a little different. The process then determines the risk involved with not changing the airplane or procedure, and if the risk is too high, the airplane design or procedure is revised. Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodologies (CAAM) The Continued Airworthiness Assessment Methodology (CAAM) was developed in the early 1990's by an Aircraft Industries Association/European Aerospace Industry Association (AIA/AECMA) Propulsion Sub-Committee in response to the need for industry and the federal aviation administration Engine and Propeller Directorate to more effectively manage engine, propeller, and auxiliary power unit (APU) unsafe conditions. CAAM is a data-driven process, which sets a limit for accident risk and provides the time allowed to correct an unsafe condition and still remain within the risk limit. CAAM has been applied most frequently to engine, propeller, and auxiliary power unit problems, but the concepts have potential application to airframe continued airworthiness as well. CAAM has identified several incident and accident precursors. • PW4000 high pressure compressor Front Drum Rotor (AD 2001-20-13) and HPT (AD 2001-20-02) cracking • AE3007 HPT 1-2 Spacer (AD 2001-19-03) with higher stresses than predicted• AE2100 HPT wheel (AD 2001-17-31) cracking• JT8D compressor disks (AD 2001-15-58) delivered with machining damage • CF34 bearing system (AD 2001-12-06) report of compartment over-temperature and excessive disk growth CAAM is a living process that continues to expand and improve. The process was updated in 1996 and is now in another update phase under the direction of the AIA Propulsion Committee. It is the basis of the FAA's draft Advisory Circular AC39-xx which applies to propulsion-related transport airplane potentially unsafe conditions [13]. Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) In 1999, the FAA-Boeing Partnership for Safety Plan working agreement on Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) was developed, based on the principles and practices to be followed in reporting, analyzing, and resolving safety events and issues related to the Boeing transport airplane fleet. Recent problems worked through this process included [14]:• Accelerated electrical connector corrosion, mostly on Boeing 737NG wheel wells, related to use of potassium phosphate runway de-icing fluid, mostly in Northern Europe • A miscalibrated angle-of-attack (AOA) vane that caused a high speed RTO. An airline was using a multi-mode shop rigging tool and erroneously set a Boeing 757 vane to Boeing 727 settings. • During a routine inspection of a Boeing 747, the primary nut on the engine strut midspar fuse pin was found backed out to the secondary retention feature. After an extensive investigation, an AD was issued to address the unsafe condition. Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) The Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) program in use by several US and international airlines captures and analyzes flight data recorder information to assist the federal aviation administration and airlines to identify unsafe trends and improve flight crew training and maintenance programs and to provide feedback to OEMs. Collection of flight operations quality assurance data enables operators to focus on specific operational problem areas such as unstabilized final approaches that can result in aircraft departing the runway or a hard landing or tail strike. Aviation Safety Action Partnership (ASAP) In 1992, American Airlines implemented the Aviation Safety Action Partnership (ASAP) program, a voluntary incident reporting system. This program is viewed as a prototype for future operational data sharing partnerships between the airlines and the FAA. ASAP is part of a growing effort by the airlines and the federal aviation administration to collect and analyze airline operational data. The correlation of ASAP trend information with objective data from flight operations quality assurance program can provide a valuable means to evaluate historical data and try to prevent accidents before they happen.The NRC Low Report [15] (1980) noted: A properly employed information system is indispensable to providing clues to, and early warning of, potential accidents. Critical to the effectiveness of such a system are the following elements:1) Information should be gathered and processed quickly, and the system should be capable of highlighting those items having possible consequences for safety.2) Additional information, beyond what is now available,should be obtained, wherever possible. The federal aviation administration needs to devote more attention to the safety information passing between and among the airlines and manufacturers that is now largely outside its purview.3) Analysis of the data should be made by well-qualified users.4) The users of the system must be disciplined to determine the cause of every incident, failure or accident, to require that corrective action be taken, and to provide feedback to all concerned parties.This position is also supported by recommendations made in the 1998 Continuing Airworthiness Risk Evaluation (CARE) Report [16, Chapter 2.3.6]. Implementation of these recommended processes from the Low and CARE reports, as well those from radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 [17], could consolidate data collection efforts and focus on the needs of data analysts examining data for safety and reliability improvement opportunities.Data management programs must create products and services that effectively identify accident precursors. The focus needs to be on interventions to prevent the next accident by implementing lessons learned from previous accident and incident investigations. Data collection, data mining, and analysis with automated tools must be developed to alleviate resource constraints and human error. Resources for these efforts are available by integrating existing data management programs. As a result of the unique requirements of regulators and industry, it is probably impossible to create a one-size-fits-all program. In the short term, the federal aviation administration should coordinate resource utilization and review and implement best practices. Expediency is important since natural and man-made hazards continue to threaten the safe and efficient transportation of the traveling public.