Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The Report of the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process. March 2002 US Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration March 14, 2002 Federal Aviation Administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification 800 Independence Avenue, S.W.Washington, DC Major Repairs and Modifications Once the manufacturer releases an aircraft to an operator, the operator is responsible for maintaining its continued airworthiness. Maintaining continued airworthiness involves routine maintenance, as well as repairs and alterations to the aircraft. For all of these activities, an approved configuration must be maintained. Maintenance, repair, and alteration work is accomplished using either federal aviation administration approved or accepted data, including operator and manufacturer (user) documents.14 code of federal regulations §43.13 states: Each person performing maintenance, and alterations, or preventative maintenance on an aircraft, engine, propeller, or appliance shall use the methods, techniques, and practices prescribed in the current manufacturer’s maintenance manual, or instructions for continued airworthiness prepared by its manufacturer, or other methods, techniques, and practices acceptable to the Administrator.These findings were based on reviews of relevant requirements and advisory material, case studies, historical reports, presentations by and discussions with operators, personnel from large and small maintenance, repair, and alteration companies, Principal Maintenance Inspectors, and team member.Improvements in the areas of repair and alteration classification, quality of the implementation of repairs and alterations, and the process to provide accurate and timely information into user manuals are needed in order to assure continued airworthiness of the aircraft. Finding 12 There is no standard process used across the commercial aviation industry or regulatory authority to determine and classify repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft as Major [1] as prescribed by applicable FARs [2]. The result of misclassifying a repair or alteration is the lack of adequate review, validation, and reporting of the sufficiency of repairs or alterations developed for commercial aircraft. Consistency is needed in the major or minor repair decision processes. A major repair or alteration should use a controlled process requiring record keeping, reporting requirements and federal aviation administration approved data [3]. The lack of a consistent process can lead to a tendency of operators and repair stations to avoid use of the Major category for repairs and alterations. Repairs and alterations that are classified as Minor generally result in less paperwork and reduced inspection requirements for the maintenance activity. The reason for this inconsistency is that FARs and guidance material lack clear and unambiguous decision logic that would allow consistent and proper classification of a repair or alteration as Major. Some operators have developed a detailed decision logic process that more adequately address the Major/ Minor classification requirement than those of other operators. Repair stations may develop their own major or minor decision process or default to the customer’s decision process.Interviews with repair station [4], federal aviation administration [5,6], and air carrier personnel [7] revealed that there is continuing concern that the lack of a standardized process for the appropriate classification of repairs and alterations can have an adverse impact on the continued airworthiness of aircraft. Rather than a uniform industry-wide process, each airline operator or federal aviation administration certificated repair station has the responsibility for the determination and classification of repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft in accordance with applicable FARs such as 14 code of federal regulations Part 43, Appendix A and B.An Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) working group, the Clarification of Major/Minor Repairs or Alterations Working Group, was established in 1994 to examine this issue [8]. The existence of this activity indicates the federal aviation administration and industry have recognized this subject as a significant concern in aviation safety.The result of a standardized classification process for major repairs and alterations to aircraft will be to enhance aircraft safety by assuring that all 14 code of federal regulations Part 121 operators and 14 code of federal regulations Part 145 repair stations use an appropriate level of decision logic. This will maintain the focus on safety and continued airworthiness when addressing repairs or alterations to commercial transport aircraft. Finding 13 Inconsistencies exist between the safety assessments conducted for the initial Type Certificate (TC) of an airplane and some of those conducted for subsequent alterations to the airplane or systems. Improved federal aviation administration and industry oversight of repair and alteration activity is needed to ensure that safety has not been compromised by subsequent repairs and alterations. Quality of Alterations and Repair Processes Processes for the design and accomplishment of repairs and alterations, including oversight, have not always ensured the continued airworthiness of the airplane. Safety assessments prepared for certification of alterations to the airplane or systems may not meet the same standards as those for the original type certificate, although the FARs require they do so. Cases exist where the modification station or company did not have the appropriate expertise or access to original certification data to conduct adequate safety analyses. Two case studies revealed a lack of design expertise or the use of pertinent original equipment manufacturer design data, which may have contributed to an accident or significant non-airworthiness condition. In the Boeing 727 passenger-to-freighter conversion, the federal aviation administration found no, or limited, structural analysis for the pressure deck, wing-box beams, and the lateral floor restraint in the Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) file [9]. In later analysis the federal aviation administration determined that the margins of safety calculated for the floor beams in the supplemental type certificate did not comply with CAR 4.b requirements [10]. After the Swissair Flight 111 accident, the federal aviation administration conducted a Special Certification Review (SCR) of the In-flight Entertainment System (IFE) [11]. The review was to evaluate the design, installation, and certification process of the approved IFE system. The SCR team determined that the IFE system electrical power switching was not compatible with the original equipment manufacturer design concept of the MD-11. The Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) is leading the investigation for this accident and has not completed its work or established a probable cause.The consistency of federal aviation administration and industry oversight varies greatly, which has resulted in some repairs and alterations being non-compliant with the FARs. Published historical reports [12,13,14,15] and CPS team interviews with commercial airline operators [16, 17] and federal aviation administration certificated repair station personnel [18] have confirmed there has been, and can continue to be, an adverse impact on commercial aviation safety when there is insufficient oversight. There is no requirement for a facility approved to perform major repairs and alterations [19], or for an supplemental type certificate applicant, to consult with the federal aviation administration ACO and aircraft evaluation group offices involved in the original TC approval, the OEM, or holders of other STCs applicable to that work. Cases exist where failure to do this has had an adverse impact on the continued airworthiness of the aircraft. The supplemental type certificate Process Review Final Report [12] has also cited this concern. The lack of clear requirements for repairs and alterations, combined with inadequate federal aviation administration and Industry oversight, result in the potential for insufficient repairs or alterations of commercial transport aircraft. The subject of this finding is closely linked to Finding 4 and 10 in this report. Observation 1 original equipment manufacturer and Operator maintenance manuals, illustrated parts catalogs (IPC), wiring diagrams, and other documents needed to maintain aircraft in an airworthy configuration after incorporation of service bulletins (SB) and Airworthiness Directives (AD), are not always revised to reflect each aircraft’s approved configuration at the time the modifications are implemented. Airworthiness Directive/ Service Bulletin Information Flow into Field Reference Materials Maintenance manuals, illustrated parts catalogs (IPCs), wiring diagrams and other federal aviation administration accepted or approved manuals are required for continued airworthiness. Incorrect data as a result of delayed revisions to user manuals can result in the release of aircraft into service in a non-airworthy configuration. Airworthiness directives [20] and service bulletins are not stand-alone documents. These documents usually refer to other documents to provide detailed instructions for accomplishment. Most ADs rely on Service Bulletins, which in turn may reference maintenance manuals, wiring diagrams, or illustrated parts catalog (IPC) information to accomplish the work. This information, which may be referenced in the AD or SB, may not have been revised to the standard assumed in the AD or SB. When SBs are incorporated into an aircraft, the instructions in the SB should be considered for information necessary for the continued airworthiness of the aircraft. During CPS team interviews, it was observed that there is risk that information needed for this continued airworthiness is not always incorporated into the user documents within a reasonable time. During an interview [21], a situation was cited where a mechanic had used an illustrated parts catalog that had not been revised to reflect the requirements of an AD and resulted in the use of a component not authorized by the AD. The mechanic performing this work used the latest published manual information available. The information did not reflect the AD requirements and there was nothing to alert the mechanic to the fact that this action dealt with an AD modified configuration. This missing information resulted in an installation that was not in compliance with an AD; therefore, the airplane could be considered non-airworthy. A concern also exists with supplemental type certificate configuration management. An supplemental type certificate approved for incorporation on a fleet type may not consider the wide range of actual aircraft configuration differences within that fleet. The information for continuing airworthiness should be provided for incorporation into the user accepted or approved manuals to assure supplemental type certificate and AD configurations are not altered during routine maintenance. A process is needed to adequately assure that proper repairs and modifications are implemented and that mandated configurations are not altered. All manuals and documents that are affected by ADs, AMOCs (Alternative Methods of Compliance), STCs, or other authorized documents must be revised to reflect the mandated aircraft design configuration in order to assure continued airworthiness.This problem has been recognized as critical in the development and acceptance of Extended Range Operations with Two-Engine Aircraft (ETOPS) operations. As a result, for extended operations aircraft the Configuration, Maintenance, Procedures (CMP) document is a controlling document that is federal aviation administration approved. The procedure used for extended operations operations and maintenance is recognized as an improvement in the ability of an operator to maintain an approved configuration on the aircraft.Configuration control problems associated with the use of equivalent or substituted parts to AD or AMOC mandated configurations can exist. There are instances of inadvertent parts substitutions within the manufacturer’s or operator’s material management systems that may result in unapproved configurations being implemented into the aircraft. An improved process is needed for a mandating document to specify areas where manufacturer and operator flexibility is allowed and areas where no flexibility is allowed. The consequence of a lag in introducing continuing airworthiness information into user manuals is the risk of an aircraft being released into service in a non-airworthy configuration, or an AD or supplemental type certificate required configuration being altered during future maintenance activity.