Title: Commercial Aviation Safety– Chapter 9 Author(s): Stephen K. Cusick; Antonio I. Cortes; Clarence C. Rodrigues Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, Accidents INTRODUCTION Although not the case in other types of aviation, the commercial aviation operations discussed in this book all commence and terminate at airports. The design of airports and the operations that support commercial flights must all be structured around safety. A commercial airport, by definition, is a tract of land (or water) that provides facilities for landing, takeoff, shelter, supply, and repair of aircraft and has a passenger terminal. This results in a diverse collection of complex operations, each with its own set of safety issues. This chapter provides an overview of the certification process, the certification manual, and safety issues concerning airports. Extended discussions are conducted on some of the more hazardous operations, such as fuel handling and runway incursions. Highlights of federal aviation administration Federal Aviation Regulations Part 139 and other relevant regulations are also reviewed. AIRPORT CERTIFICATION The Federal Aviation Act of 1958 was broadened in 1970 to authorize the federal aviation administration Administrator to issue operating certificates to certain categories of airports serving air carrier aircraft. The 1970 Act also added a clause that barred any person from operating an airport or any air carrier from operating in an airport that did not possess a certificate if it was required or if the airport was in violation of the terms of an issued certificate. The intent of the certification was to establish minimum safety standards for the operation of airports to ensure the safety of the flying public. To be certified by the FAA, airports are required to meet certain standards for airport design, construction, maintenance, and operations as well as firefighting and rescue equipment, runway and taxiway guidance signs, control of vehicles, management of wildlife hazards, and record keeping. The federal aviation administration works with certificated air­ports to help them meet these standards through periodic consultations and site inspections. AIRPORT CERTIFICATION CLASSIFICATION The federal aviation administration classifies U.S. airports as follows under FAR Part 139 (www.faa.gov): • Class I Airport- an airport certificated to serve all of the following: scheduled operations of large air carrier aircraft, unscheduled passenger operations of large air carrier aircraft, and/or scheduled operations of small air carrier aircraft. • Class II Airport- an airport certificated to serve both scheduled operations of small air carrier aircraft and unscheduled passenger operations of large air carrier aircraft. A Class II airport cannot serve scheduled large air carrier aircraft. • Class III Airport- an airport certificated to serve scheduled operations of small air carrier aircraft. A Class III airport cannot serve scheduled or unscheduled large air carrier aircraft. • Class IV Airport airport certificated to serve unscheduled passenger opera­tions of large air carrier aircraft. A Class IV airport cannot serve scheduled large or small air carrier aircraft. • Joint-Use Airport - means an airport owned by the Department of Defense, at which both military and civilian aircraft make shared use of the airfield. In the United States, there are approximately 532 Part 139 airports as of September 2016 classified as follows (www.faa.gov): Class I: 395 airports Class II: 29 airports Class III: 29 airports Class IV: 79 airports An airport that meets FAR Part 139 criteria is issued an Airport Operating Certificate (AOC). To obtain a certificate, an airport must maintain specific operational and safety standards. The federal aviation administration generally provides guidance on meet­ing the requirements of Part 139 certification through documents called Advisory Circulars (ACs). The federal aviation administration also issues annual CertAlerts through the Airport Safety and Operations Division of the Office of Airport Safety and Standards that serve as a quick means of providing both the public and federal aviation administration staff with important certifica­tion-related guidance. Fully certificated airports must maintain an Airport Certification Manual (ACM) that details operating procedures, facilities, equipment, and other appropri­ate information as listed in the following section. AIRPORT CERTIFICATION MANUAL (ACM): federal aviation administration AC No. 150/5210-22 Every certificated airport that serves air carriers is required to have an ACM in accordance with Part 139. The ACM is a working document that outlines the means and procedures used to comply with the requirements of Part 139. While each airport has its own unique features and operational requirements, its Airport Certification Manual must contain basic elements appropriate to its class, which include the following: 1. Lines of succession for airport operations responsibility. Each current exemption from Part 139 issued to the airport from the requirement s. 3. Any limitations imposed by the federal aviation administration Administrator. 4. A grid map or other means of identifying locations and terrain features on and around the airport that are significant to emergency operations. The location of each obstruction is required to be lit or marked within the airport's area of authority. 6. A description of each movement area available for air carriers and its safety areas, and each road that serves each area. 7. Procedures during construction work to avoid the interruption or failure of utilities serving facilities or NAVAIDS that support air carrier operations. 8. A description of the system for maintaining records. A description of personnel training. 10. Procedures for maintaining the paved areas of the airport. 11. Procedures for maintaining the unpaved areas of the airport. 2. Procedures for maintaining the safety areas of the airport. 13. A plan showing the runway and taxiway identification system, including the location and inscription of signs, runway markings, and holding position markings. 14. A description of and procedures for maintaining the marking, signs, and light­ing systems. 15. A snow and ice control plan. 16. A description of the facilities, equipment, personnel, and procedures for meet­ng the aircraft rescue and firefighting requirements. 17. A description of any approved exemption to aircraft rescue and firefighting requirements. 18. Procedures for protecting persons and property during the storing, dispensing, and handling of fuel and other hazardous substances and materials. 19. A description of and procedures for maintaining the traffic and wind direction indicators. 20. An Airport Emergency Plan (AEP). 21. Procedures for conducting the airport self-inspection program. 22. Procedures for controlling pedestrians and ground vehicles in movement areas and safety areas. 23. Procedures for obstruction removal, marking, or lighting. 24. Procedures for protection of NAVAIDS. 25. A description of public protection at the airport. 26. Procedures for wildlife hazard management. 27. Procedures for airport condition reporting. 28. Procedures for identifying, marking, and lighting construction and other unser­viceable areas. 9. Any other item that the federal aviation administration Administrator finds is necessary to ensure safety in air transportation. (Source: FAA.gov) The Airport Emergency Plan is an integral part of the ACM, although it may be published and distributed separately to each user or airport tenant. The plan must be extremely detailed and provide sufficient guidance on response to all emergencies and abnormal conditions that the airport is likely to encounter. Emergencies include aircraft accidents, bomb threats, sabotage, hijackings, major fires, and natural disasters such as floods, tornadoes, earthquakes, and power failures. Emergency response plans should spell out procedures for internally coordinating with airport and firefighting personnel and the control tower. In addition, proce­dures should be established for coordination with external agencies such as law enforcement, rescue squads, fire departments, ambulances and emergency trans­portation, and hospital and medical facilities. The Airport Emergency Plan must be reviewed at least annually, and for Class I airports, there must be a full-scale exercise of the plan every 3 years. (Source: federal aviation administration AC No. 150/5200-31 C) OPERATIONAL SAFETY As mentioned earlier, airport operations are complex and diverse, with hazards and their severity varying by the type of operation. For the purposes of our discussion, airport safety issues will be discussed under the following headings: • Airport terminal buildings • Hangars and maintenance shops • Ramp operations • Specialized airport services • Aviation fuel handling • Aircraft rescue and firefighting (ARFF) • Deicing and anti-icing. AIRPORT TERMINAL BUILDINGS These facilities are laid out to minimize passenger delays and maximize the through­put of travelers from the airport terminal entry point to the aircraft. Inadequate layout and facility size lead to overcrowding, which can cause dangerous condi­tions that lead to injuries. Safety should be given during the design, construction, and modification of the facilities so as to minimize hazards that cause falls and protect people from harmful contact with machinery. Most of the design standards and requirements for building materials, fire protection, and building egress are covered by building codes (e.g., the International Building Code), the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI); and other local, state, and federal agencies. For opera­tional issues, airports should adhere to occupational safety and health administration standards (which incorporate many of the standards from the above-mentioned organizations). A summary of impor­tant safety considerations for airport terminal facilities follows: • Emergency evacuation and egress routes, signs, and other marking should con­form to the Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, and occupational safety and health administration regulations 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910, Subpart E, "Exit Routes, Emergency Action Plans, and Fire Prevention Plans." Some additional notes are as follows: • Exits should be well-lighted and marked. • Panic hardware should be installed and properly working on the inside of exterior doors used for emergency exits. • Exit doors should be kept unobstructed and unlocked in the direction of egress. • Emergency evacuation plans should be posted in all buildings. • All areas must be accessible to persons with disabilities (more information on the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and this topic can be found in Advisory Circular 150/5360-14). • All slip and trip hazards must be eliminated, and fall prevention strategies should be implemented on stairways, escalators, and moving walkways. • Stairs, ladders, and ramps should be kept clean and free of obstacles or slippery substances and should be maintained in good condition. Both interior and exterior stairways should be sufficiently lighted so that all treads and landings are clearly visible. Prevention of falls, slips, and trips on any walking and working surface is regulated under 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart D. • There must be safe access to heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning systems for maintenance to permit safe and convenient replacement of heavy equipment (e.g., pumps and motors). In this connection, safe means for maintaining luminaries and windows must be provided. • Skylight and roof openings must be provided with protective screens to prevent individuals from falling through. • Doors should open automatically to eliminate inconvenience to people with baggage and to the handicapp ed. Also, doors should open away from the person going through. • Escalators, elevators, and moving sidewalks should comply with ANSI Standard A17.2 (Series). Speeds for moving walkways and escalators should be set at the lower limit of the acceptable range. • Moving walkways should have emergency stop buttons at both ends and, wherever feasible, every 50 meters apart. Attention-grabbing techniques should be installed to warn passengers that they are approaching the end of a moving walkway. • Ticket counters should be ergonomically designed to permit safe body posture during baggage handling and data entry. Weight scales and post-weigh-in bag­gage conveyors should be installed as close to floor level as practical to minimize lifting, and entrances to the scales should be free so as to permit baggage sliding as opposed to lifting. occupational safety and health administration regulates ergonomic hazards (or any other recog­nized hazard that does not have a specific regulation) under the General Duty Clause listed in Section 5(a) of the occupational safety and health administration Act. • All electrical systems and power services should be installed, maintained, and inspected according to the National Electrical Code, NFPA 70. occupational safety and health administration regulates electrical practices under 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 SubpartS. • Fire extinguishers and sprinkler systems should be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 10 and NFPA 13. occupational safety and health administration addresses fire prevention under 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart L. HANGARS AND MAINTENANCE SHOPS • Maintenance and other operational issues • Roofs should be inspected regularly, especially after violent storms. • The maximum allowable loading per square foot of floors should be promi­nently displayed in all storage areas to avoid damage or collapse. • Floors and stairways should not be waxed if it creates a slipping hazard. • Planning and design guidance for airport terminals is included in Advisory Circular (AC) 150/5360-13 and AC 150/5360-9 for non-hub locations. Construction of hangars is covered by federal, state, and local building codes as well as many National Fire Protection Association standards. Operational issues are mostly covered by occupational safety and health administration and EPA requirements. Some of the highlights include the following: • Walkways and working surfaces • Adequate aisle space and access to fire extinguishers, hoses, sprinkler control valves, and fire alarm stations should be maintained. • If work is performed at elevations in excess of 4 feet, the worker must be protected from falling by providing guardrails 42 inches high with an inter­mediate rail approximately halfway between the top rail and the standing surface. If guardrails are not feasible, an equivalent effective means of fall protection (safety harnesses, nets, etc.) must be provided. Regardless of height, if a work platform is adjacent to a hazard (e.g., dangerous equip­ment), then the worker must be protected from falling. Toe boards should be provided for the work platform on the open sides to prevent objects from falling on persons passing beneath or if there is moving machinery or equipment with which falling material could create a hazard. • Electrical • Large metal complexes such as aircraft docks should be permanently bonded, grounded, and secured to a permanent structure such as a hangar floor. Primary sources of electric power to hangars should be approved for the location according to the National Electrical Code, NFPA 70, and aircraft hangars, NFPA 409. • All other electrical operational issues, such as grounding, wiring, receptacles, and circuit breakers, are covered by 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 SubpartS. Compressed Gas, FLAMMABLES, AND Hazardous AND Toxic Substances. Storing and han­dling of compressed gases and flammable and combustible liquids are addressed under 29 code of federal regulations 1910 Subpart H, Hazardous Chemicals. Many of these standards reference or incorporate those developed by the NFPA and the Compressed Gas Association. Toxic and hazardous substances are addressed under 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart Z. • 29 code of federal regulations 1910.101 (b) addresses the in-facility handling, storage, and utilization of all compressed gas cylinders. These cylinders should be secured and stored upright when not in use and should be stored in carts designed for that purpose when in use. Gas cylinders should have their caps on except when in use. Cylinders of compatible gases should be stored together, and oxygen cylinders should be stored separately from flammable gas cylinders and other flammable or combustible substances. • General-purpose compressed air systems should not exceed 30 pounds per square inch unless specifically required (e.g., for tire inflation and special-purpose pneumatic tools). The practice of using compressed air to clean personal clothing should be avoided. • All flammable and combustible materials (paints, hydraulic fluids, greases, sol­vents, cleaning agents, etc.) should be stored and used in accordance with NFPA 30. Information on the use and handling of specific materials and processes can be found in 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart H and 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart Z, Toxic and Hazardous Substances. • Storage of flammables should be limited to quantities that are permitted for immediate short-duration uses in the shop areas. These chemicals should be stored in labeled cabinets designed and approved for flammable storage. Bulk storage of flammables should be in separate buildings designed for that purpose, which include design features such as explosion-proof electrical systems, spill containment, and automatic fire protection. Storage quantity requirements for shop and bulk storage can be found in 29 code of federal regulations 1910.10 6. • Painting and stripping are hazardous activities that use toxic chemicals and, thus, must be performed in well-ventilated areas that are separate from other maintenance activities and are designed for that purpose (e.g., paint booths). In addition, painting and stripping generate toxic wastes that must be contained and either recycled or disposed of appropriately. Therefore, these operations are governed by both occupational safety and health administration and EPA regulations. • Miscellaneous on-site use of all chemicals is covered under OSHA's Hazard Communication Standard, 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart 1200. This standard com­prehensively addresses the issues of chemical hazard evaluation, employee hazard communications, and employee personal protective equipment and procedures. In summary, this subpart requires the following: • Developing and maintaining a written hazard communication program for the workplace, including lists of hazardous chemicals present on site. • Labeling chemical containers in the workplace and those being shipped to other workplaces. • Prepare and distribute material safety data sheets (MSDS) to employees. • Developing and implementing employee training programs that detail the hazards of chemicals on site and what employees must do to protect themselves. Miscellaneous upkeep of shop and hangar areas: • The control of hazardous energy standard (29 code of federal regulations 1910.147) covers the ser­vicing and maintenance of machines and equipment in which the unexpected energization or start-up of machines or equipment, or release of stored energy (electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or gravity), could cause injury to employees. This standard requires maintenance personnel, through written equipment-specific procedures, to de-energize stored energy and positively block off all potential energy sources to systems that are being worked on by using personalized locks and tags, a process known as lockout and ragout, sometimes referred to by the acronym LOTO. • Material handling equipment such as overhead and gantry cranes that are used to move large aircraft sections are regulated under 29 code of federal regulations 1910.17 9. Slings, chains, and hoists used to move or lift smaller aircraft parts and sections (e.g., aircraft jacking) are regulated under 29 code of federal regulations 1910.184. • The use of powered material handling equipment, such as fork trucks and hand trucks, and the use and maintenance of batteries used to power these and other equipment are regulated under 29 code of federal regulations 1910.178. • Hoist units, such as those used to reach large aircraft tails, should comply with safety requirements listed under 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart F, Powered Platforms, Manlifts, and Vehicle-Mounted Work Platforms. • Heating and ventilation systems in hangars should be in accordance with NFPA 409 or the equivalent. • Welding, cutting, brazing, and other hot works that have the potential to start fires are regulated under 29 code of federal regulations Part 1910 Subpart Q. • Noise evaluation and hearing protection for processes such as riveting, sandblasting, grinding, polishing, and other noisy operations that exceed 85 decibels (time-weighted A scale for 8 hours) are regulated under 29 code of federal regulations 1910.95. • The safe use of pedestal grinders and other grinding wheels is regulated under 29 code of federal regulations 1910.215, Abrasive Wheel Machinery. RAMP OPERATIONS The ramp area is generally designed for aircraft, not the vehicles that service and/or operate in the proximity of the aircraft. Most of the signs and markings are for aircraft. Figure 9-1 shows a Delta airplane during a push-back. Ground markings are also visible in the figure and are used to assist with orientation on the ramp. The figure also shows a baggage cart driver stopped to allow the aircraft movement and a so-called wing-walker ensuring that the wingtip and other aircraft areas do not come into contact with obstructions. The ramp area sees a diverse collection of high-paced activities that involve aircraft, vehicles, and individuals working in close proximity to one another. Some of these activities include the following: • Aircraft ground handling that may include taxiing, towing, chocking, parking, or tie-down • Aircraft refueling Aircraft servicing- catering, cleaning, food service, etc. • Baggage and cargo handling • Conditioned air supply • Power supply • Routine checks and maintenance Individuals involved with the above activities are exposed to several of the occupational hazards (and hence regulated by similar regulations) mentioned earlier, including • Cuts (from antennas, pitot tubes, static discharge wicks). • Slips, trips, and falls (on the ground and from elevations ). • Strains and sprains (from baggage handling ). • Exposure to hazardous materials (fuel). • Contact with moving parts (propellers) and bumps (undersurface of fuselage). • Electrical hazards (tools, motor, generators)-electrical wiring should conform to the National Electric Code, NFPA 70, for Class I, Group D, and Division I hazardous locations. • Biohazards (bloodborne exposures during cleaning, covered under 29 code of federal regulations 1910.10 30). High-pressure air and other fluid exposures from pressurized systems. • Noise from engines and other equipment. Hearing protection is a significant health and safety issue during ramp operations. In addition, there is a potential for significant injury from exposure to jet blasts, moving aircraft, and moving vehicles. Since most of the operations take place out­doors, weather conditions (heat, cold, snow, rain, ice, and wind) can increase the risk of injury. Hazards due to aircraft refueling are discussed in the next section. SPECIALIZED AIRPORT SERVICES Specialized airport services are comprised of the following: • Aviation fuel handling • Aircraft rescue and firefighting (ARFF) • Deicing and anti-icing. Aviation Fuel Handling. Fuel handling is an important safety issue not only to the fuelers but also to other airport personnel, the traveling public, and the opera­tion of the aircraft. Failure to adhere to safe operating procedures when fueling aircraft and/or transporting fuel from one location to another at the airport can result in major disasters. This potential for disaster is well recognized, although millions of gallons of aircraft fuel are handled each year without major incidents for the most part. The basic types of aviation fuel are aviation gasoline (avgas for general aviation piston operations), jet A or jet B (commercial jet uses) fuels, and JP series (military jet uses) fuels. Guidance on fuel handling in an airport environment is covered under 14 code of federal regulations Part 139.321 (b) and the federal aviation administration advisory circulars in the 150 series (e.g., AC 150/5230-4A), all of which reflect NFPA standards (Aircraft Fuel Servicing, NFPA 407, 2007, and Aircraft Fueling Ramp Drainage, NFPA 415, 2008). It is also necessary that fueling operations, as shown in Figure 9-2, be conducted in accordance with procurement document specifications and all other applicable local, state, and federal regulations. Special attention must be paid to federal, state, and local hazardous materials regulations and to agency-specific fuel spill avoidance requirements. The major aviation safety concerns with fuel han­dling and other ramp hazards are covered in the following sections. Health Hazards To Fuelers. Repeated contact with aviation fuels can cause skin irritation and dermatitis. Skin area exposures to fuels should be washed immedi­ately with soap and water. Eyewash stations should be conveniently located for immediate flushing in case the eyes or face comes into contact with fuel. Fuels such as aviation gasoline contain additives such as benzene. Hence, fuels can be toxic if inhaled or swallowed. Fuels can also affect the central nervous system by causing narcosis, which leaves an individual in a state of stupor or unconscious ness. Threshold limits for fuel vapors in the breathing zones are established by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) and 29 code of federal regulations 1910 Subpart Z (which reflects ACGIH standards ). Fuel Contamination. Fuel contamination is a major safety issue as it can affect the operation of the aircraft. Contamination can occur by refueling an aircraft with contaminated fuel or the wrong fuel grade or type. Fuel is considered contaminated if it contains any material other than what is called for in the specifications. The two most common contaminants found in fuels are rust and water (free or emulsi­fied). Other contaminants found include microbial growths, paint, metal, rubber, and lint. Commingling, or the mixing of different fuel grades and types, is also a serious issue. For example, mixing aviation gasoline with jet fuels can reduce the volatility and antiknock features of fuels needed for reciprocating engines, which can result in engine failure. This could also create deposits in turbine engines. To prevent com­mingling, federal aviation administration Advisory Circular No.150/5230-4 (series) requires the use of sepa­rate pumps, lines, standard couplings, and color codes for each type of fuel. Also, all fuel-dispensing systems should be clearly marked and labeled to indicate the grade and type of fuel they contain. Explosions And Fires During Fueling Or Fuel Transfer. There are three essential require­ments for a fuel to burn. First, the fuel must be in its vapor form; second, it must develop the right fuel-to-air ratio with the surrounding atmosphere; and third, there must be a source of ignition to start the fire. In fuel handling, the first two conditions invariably exist, and there is very little one can do to completely eliminate these hazardous states. Hence, the primary objective during fuel handling is to control or eliminate ignition sources. Several ignition sources and their control are discussed in the following sections. STATIC ELECTRICITY. Static charge discharge is one of the most important sources of ignition and presents a constant threat to safe fueling. When two dissimilar materials come in contact with each other, a static charge of electricity develops by the exchange of positive and negative charges across the contact surfaces. Static charges build up when fuel gets pumped through the fuel lines. The quantity of static electricity produced is directly proportional to the fuel flow rate. Also, due to their lower volatility, jet fuels are generally more susceptible to ignition from static discharges than are aviation fuels. Static electricity also gets generated when fuel is allowed to free-fall through the air, as when a tank is filled through a spout. An electrically charged atmosphere can build up charges on an aircraft, as can rain, snow, or dust blowing across the aircraft. While completely eliminating static charge is impractical, several steps can be taken to minimize its buildup. Some of these steps are as follows: • Follow correct grounding and bonding procedures, as listed in AC 00-34 (series), "Aircraft Ground Handling and Servicing." • Avoid pumping contaminated fuels since dirt and water particles in the fuel will add to the static charge accumulation. • Reduce fuel flow rates to decrease turbulence, where feasible. Reduced flow rates allow longer periods for the static charge to dissipate . • Prevent fuel from free-falling through the air to the bottom of the tank. SPARKS. Arcing may occur when electrical connections are made or from faulty equipment and improperly maintained ramp vehicles. To avoid sparks, the follow­ing precautions should be taken: • Aircraft batteries should not be installed or removed, nor should battery chargers be operated during fueling operatio ns. • Aircraft ground power units should be located as far away as possible from the fueling points. • Battery-powered tools as opposed to electrically powered tools should be used near aircraft during fueling. • Aircraft radios should be shut off. Also, fueling should not be performed within 100 feet of energized airborne radar. • Flashings used near the fueling area should be UL-approved for use in such locations. • Workers near the fueling area should be advised against wearing footwear with metal nails or cleats or metal plates on the heels. Explosions And Fires During Fuel Tank Repair. Maintenance work on aircraft fuel cells and tanks, and on bulk fuel storage tanks presents similar inhalation and fire hazards as described above. It is extremely important that cells and tanks be drained and thoroughly vented before any maintenance work is attempted, especially hot work such as welding, brazing, and cutting. If tanks are large enough for an employee to enter and perform work, then confined-space testing, entry, and rescue procedures should be adhered to as required by 29 code of federal regulations 1910.146. Positive pressure should be employed for venting and should be undertaken with an approved blower (with non-sparking blades and an isolated non-sparking blower motor) using a grounded hose. Miscellaneous. Other issues to be considered for minimizing ignition sources include the following: • No-smoking rules should be strictly enforced. • Employees should not be allowed to carry matches, lighters, and other smoking paraphernalia when engaged in fueling operations. • Welding, cutting, or other hot work should not be conducted within at least 35 feet (preferably 50 feet) of fueling. Similar distance restrictions should be maintained for open-flame lights and exposed-flame heaters. • Fuel pits should be located at least 50 feet away from a terminal building or concourse. HAZARDS FROM SPILLS. Fuel spills present varying degrees of safety issues depending on the size of the spill and the kind of response required. While simple flushing may be appropriate for small spills, larger spills may require the use of absorbents, adsor­bents, and chemical fixants. Leaks from underground storage tanks (USTs) present a different set of safety issues. Spills and USTs are regulated by EPA (as mentioned in earlier chapters) and local and state jurisdictions. Also, depending on the response planned by the facility, occupational safety and health administration regulations 29 code of federal regulations 1910.120 could apply. Some of the issues to consider in connection with fuel spills include the following: • Leak/spill prevention • Emergency response procedures • Reporting and notifications • Spill control/containment • Cleanup procedures • Employee training Aircraft Rescue And Firefighting (ARFF). Responding to aircraft crashes is a high-risk job, leaving individuals exposed to a wide variety of safety hazards such as deal­ing with fire, smoke, chemicals, blood, and other body fluids and lifting in awkward postures. aircraft rescue and firefighting training, therefore, should include varying levels of occupational safety and health administration training depending on the level of responder involvement. To develop an understanding of the safety issues involved with aircraft rescue and firefighting, a review of current aircraft rescue and firefighting procedures is necessary. As mentioned earlier, all certificated airports must have a plan to respond to all conceivable emergencies. The Airport Emergency Plan is an integral part of the Airport Certification Manual. A major emergency that an airport has to plan for is aircraft crashes, which are handled under the aircraft rescue and firefighting plan. This plan is based on the largest aircraft that is likely to be serviced by the airport. Detailed requirements and procedures for aircraft rescue and firefighting equipment and agents are contained in federal aviation administration regulations as follows: • Part 139.315 (Aircraft rescue and firefighting: Index determination ). • Part 139.317 (Aircraft rescue and firefighting: Equipment and agents). • Part 139.319 (Aircraft rescue and firefighting: Operational requirements ). Aircraft rescue services and firefighting equipment are based on an index as determined by the length of the air carrier aircraft and the frequency of departures. Figure 9-3 shows an example of the type of fire and rescue vehicle that may show up in the event of an emergency. For current information on federal aviation administration aircraft rescue and firefighting Advisory Circulars, please see the AC 150/5200 (series) of documents. For further information on airport index classification and other aircraft rescue and firefighting requirements refer to Title 14, Part 139 Subpart D (Operations). DEICING AND ANTI-ICING. Ice and snow on control, airfoil, and sensor surfaces can have serious repercussions on the safe operation of the aircraft. Hence, when freezing or near-freezing conditions are likely to be present, the aircraft should not be allowed to takeoff before being sprayed with deicing fluid when contamination is present or anti-icing fluid when contamination may occur prior to becoming air­borne. Once in the air, commercial aircraft have systems that prevent the accumula­tion of most types or icing, but those systems are inadequate on the ground due to several unavoidable design criteria. Figure 9-4 shows a deicing or anti-icing opera­tion underway with spraying protective fluid on the top of a main wing. To the naked eye it can be difficult to distinguish if a deicing or anti-icing. operation is underway. Sometimes a deicing operation is performed first to remove contaminants and then is followed by an anti-icing operation if precipitation is still occurring that could cause future contaminati on. Sometimes deicing occurs with­out anti-icing and vice versa. Often both operations are described under the term "deicing" out of simplicity. Numerous accidents have occurred due to attempted takeoffs with contaminated surfaces. The reader should also note that such accidents can happen outside of winter. For example, an MD-80 completing a long flight and then performing a quick-turn on the ramp in a humid environment, such as Los Angeles, can have frost form on parts of the wing since the fuel that was not used in the wings had several hours to chill while cruising at altitude. This situation may occur at outside air temperatures that are significantly above freezing and on a beautiful sunny day. That is why it is not uncommon to see deicing trucks in operation at locations such as Los Angeles, which some might find difficult to understand because the city is often associated with a modest climate. Since this chapter is about airport safety, let us focus on the risks associated with the actual deicing/anti-icing operation. Deicing and anti-icing operations present five distinct hazards: • Damage to the aircraft by the deicing equipment . • Application of deicing fluid to areas where it should not be applied, such as static ports, pitot heads, angle-of-attack sensors, the engine, and other inlets. • Hazards (inhalation and ingestion) to the deicing crew and to the environment, since deicing fluids are considered hazardous materials and are moderately toxic. • Hazards to the crew and passengers if the cabin air intakes are not shut off during deicing. • Falls, slips, and other safety hazards during the application process. Deicing crews should have trammg as required by OSHA's Hazard Communication standard (29 code of federal regulations 1910.12 00). Also, material safety data sheets (MSDS), which list health hazards and protection information on the deicing and anti-icing fluids being used, should be made readily available. The vapors or aero­sols of deicing fluids can cause nose and throat irritation, headaches, vomiting, and dizziness. For high-volume applications it is recommended that personnel be fitted with respirators in accordance with 29 code of federal regulations 1910.13 4. Ingestion of deicing fluids can affect the kidneys and the central nervous system. However, these fluids are so highly diluted with water that large quantities would need to be consumed to be lethal. Application crews usually work on elevated platforms (baskets at the end of booms) and would therefore have to be adequately protected from falling through safety harnesses and guardrails. Finally, spent fluid is a regulated waste and there­fore should be used, collected, and recovered /disposed of in accordance with EPA and other federal and local regulations. The federal aviation administration has recently adopted the European deicing standard called the Standardized International Aircraft Ground Deice Program. federal aviation administration Advisory Circular 120-60 (series) is the primary federal aviation administration guid­nce document for the development of an air carrier's ground deicing program. RUNWAY INCURSIONS The prospect of two planes colliding is horrifying. It conjures an image of twisted, flaming wreckage falling from the sky. Yet such catastrophic collisions can easily occur on the ground when the safe, coordinated use of runways breaks down. The worst aviation disaster on record was, in fact, the result of two Boeing 747s colliding on a runway at Tenerife Airport in the Spanish Canary Islands. It was foggy when the accident occurred in 1977, as the captain of one of the Boeing 747s failed to obey a "hold in position" instruction from air traffic control (ATC) and started his takeoff roll before the other Boeing 74 7 cleared the runway. This catastrophic incident resulted in the loss of 583 lives. In the United States, the deadliest runway incursion accident occurred in August 2006 in Lexington, Kentucky, when Comair Flight 5191, a regional jet, crashed after taking off from the wrong runway, killing 49 of the 50 people on board (NTSB.gov). The reasons for these significant prob­lems are varied and complex but can be boiled down to human error, often associated with communication and operating in a challenging and sometimes confusing environment. Improving runway safety was on the national transportation safety board list of "Most Wanted Transportation Safety Improvements" for nearly two decades. The FAA's report on incursion severity for the period of FY2004 to FY2007 documents a total of 1,353 runway incursions spread over nearly 250 million hours of operation. This approximates 5.4 runway incursions per million operations. Of these 1,353 incursions, 92% were minor in nature. While this is a good record by any measure, there is serious concern that an increasing number of airplanes, vehicles, and peo­ple are mistakenly coming dangerously close to each other. With predicted increases in air traffic volume in a system that is already constrained, the number of incursions would most certainly increase. What's more, even if the incursion rates stay the same, there will be an increase in the absolute number of incursions if nothing is done about it, which of course would increase the probability of catastrophic incursions. It is for this reason that the federal aviation administration places a very high priority on controlling runway incursions . Despite the fact that pilot deviation errors result in more runway incursions than any other factor, minimizing runway incursions requires a joint effort from all groups involved in the management of the airport operations system, that is, the pilots, controllers, vehicle operators, and other ground staff. In recent years, the federal aviation administration has joined forces with international civil aviation organization member countries and industry groups to take an integrated approach to the serious problem of runway incursions. A Global Runway Safety Symposium at international civil aviation organization in May 2011 recom­mended a multidisciplinary approach to improving runway safety outcomes. Terminology and definitions used have been harmonized to provide a better under­standing of the problem of runway incursions. Both international civil aviation organization and federal aviation administration have jointly defined a runway incursion as follows: "any occurrence at an aerodrome involving the incorrect presence of an aircraft, vehicle, or person on the protected area of a surface designated for the landing and take-off of aircraft." In order to promote global harmonization and effective data sharing, both international civil aviation organization and federal aviation administration have also established a standard classification scheme to measure the severity of runway incursions, as seen in Figure 9-5. According to the latest federal aviation administration National Runway Safety Plan (2015-2017), the number of most serious incursions- Categories A and B- Continued to fall from a total of 67 in FY2000 to just 11 in FY2013. Between FY2008 and FY2010, Category A and B events fell at a rate of 50% per year. Category D Incident that meets the definition of runway incursion such as incorrect presence of a single vehicle/person/ aircraft on the protected area of a surface Designated for the landing and takeoff of aircraft but with no immediate safety consequences. Category C: An incident characterized by ample time and/or distance to avoid a collision. Category B An incident in which separation decreases and there is a significant potential for collision, which may result in a time critical corrective/ evasive response to avoid a collision. Category A: A serious incident in which a collision was narrowly avoided. Accident: An incursion that result in a collision AIRPORT SuRFACE ENVIRONMENT The typical airport surface environment is a complex system of markings, lighting, and signage coupled with layouts that vary by airport. Under adverse weather condition s, the complexity of the environment increases as visibility diminishes and visual cues are concealed. Cryptic signs and surface markings together with pilots new to a particular airport pose additional difficulties, as does nighttime flying where airport lights blend with background city lights. It is within this environment that large numbers of individuals with vary­ing levels of experience, training, and language proficiency must concentrate on performing their tasks against a backdrop of intense radio communications or coordinated actions and procedures that are needed for smooth and safe operations-all this while interfacing with large numbers of airplanes and ground vehicles of differing makes and models that are in close proximity to one another. Given the complexity and intensity of the operation, it is easy to understand why even well-trained, highly conscientious individuals remain vulnerable to error, especially when faced with unusual or unexpected situations. Runway incursions are invariably the result of human error. With expected growth in air traffic over the next several years likely to exceed planned capa city requiremen ts, even if the incursion rate is reduced or held steady, the absolute number of these events could increase over time . Since runway incursions result from human error, be it associated with ATC, aircrew, or airport design, it would be beneficial to review some of the jobs and tasks involved with conducting airport operations so that one can get a better understanding of which task elements have the greatest potential to cause errors. Airport ground operations are managed by air traffic controllers, pilots, and air­port personnel. These groups jointly manage aircraft, coordinate vehicular traffic, and monitor and maintain conditions of runways, taxiways, aprons, signs, mark­ings, and lighting. Controllers serve as the hub for the entire operation. Issuing clearances, instructions, and advisories to pilots and other ground vehicle operators, con­trollers guide all traffic that operates on the aprons, taxiways, and runways. controllers monitor the surface conditions together with the identity, location, and movement of aircraft and other vehicles by looking out through the tower win­dows. Pilots for their part use airport layout maps, surface taxiway/runway signs, markings, and lighting that they observe from the flight deck to guide them from he runways to the gates and back. Pilots and controllers rely primarily on visual feedback to maintain situation awareness and separation. Vehicle operators man­age baggage, fuel, catering, and miscellaneous ground handling functions. They are required to follow controllers' instructions to maneuver, especially if they have to cross runways. A sampling of vehicles required at most airports includes the following: Fuel trucks for aircraft refueling. • federal aviation administration vehicles are used for monitoring and maintaining navigation equipment, radars, visibility-measuring equipment, and certain lighting systems. • Airport authority vehicles are used to check for foreign objects and monitor runway conditions. • Maintenance vehicles. • Snowplows and mowers for maintaining runways and surrounding areas. • Baggage, catering, and utility trucks for flight service. • Emergency vehicles for crash and fire rescue. • Construction vehicles for maintaining airport surfaces or new construction. As can be seen from the preceding discussion, there is ample opportunity for human error given the significant combination of tasks, procedure s, and equipment that must be coordinated to permit the operation of the system . TYPES OF AIRPORT SuRFACE EVENTS Runway incursions are classified by type, typically falling into one of three catego­ries as indicated below: • Operational Incident-a surface event attributed to air traffic control action or inaction. • Pilot Deviation-action of a pilot that violates any federal aviation regulati on. (Example: A pilot crosses a runway without a clearance while en route to an air­port gate}. • Vehicle/Pedestrian Deviations-any entry or movement on the movement area or safety area by a vehicle (including aircraft operated by a non-pilot or an aircraft being towed) or pedestrian that has not been authorized by ATC. CoNTROL STRATEGIES AND FuTURE INITIATIVES The FAA's Office of Runway Safety has sponsored several initiatives to improve this critical safety area. In its document entitled National Runway Safety Plan 2015-2017, the federal aviation administration outlines several programs, which should further the progress of increasing runway safety over the next several years: SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYsTEM (SMS) IMPLEMENTA TION. In 2005, international civil aviation organization directed its member nations to establish an safety management system program at all certificated international airports. The federal aviation administration has taken the following steps to implement safety management system externally and internally at more than 530 airports certificated under FAR Part 139: • The latest FAA's notice of proposed rulemaking was issued in July 2016. The federal aviation administration now proposes to require an safety management system only for those airports classified as a small, medium, or large hub airport. • federal aviation administration has issued Advisory Circular 150/5200-37 (series) to introduce safety management system to U.S. airports. Runway safety will remain a top priority for federal aviation administration using the four safety management system components of Safety Policy, Safety Risk Management, Safety Assurance, and Safety Promoti on. Additional information on the safety management system process will be provided in Chapter 12. CuRRENT TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL OuTREACH PROGRAMS: • Quarterly air traffic controller refresher training at every control tower. • Pilot training and instruction during flight instructor review clinics and during flight reviews to increase situational awareness. • Utilization of the federal aviation administration Safety Team and the AOPA Air Safety Foundation to promote educational programs including runway safety videos at both the national and regional levels. These outreach programs will train general aviation pilots in runway safety principles. • Runway Safety Action Teams have been established to develop action plans for specific local airports. federal aviation administration promotion of industry association and international civil aviation organization runway safety seminars such as the Global Runway Safety Symposium in Montreal, Canada (May 2011) . TECHNOLOGY DEvELOPMENT TO CoNTROL RuNWAY INCURSIONS: • Airport Movement Area Safety System (AMASS) has been installed at the nation's top 34 airports to provide an automatic visual and audio alert to con­trollers when the system detects potential collisions. • Airport Surface Detection Equipment, Model X (ASDE-X), is being deployed at 35 of the busiest U.S. airports to provide precise surface detection automatically using a combination of radar, transponder, and ADS-B technology. • Runway Status Lights (RWSL) are being deployed at 22 large airports. RWSLs are red lights embedded in the pavement to signal potentially unsafe situations. • Final Approach Runway Occupancy Signal (FAROS) is designed to provide a visual alert of runway status to pilots in flight by automatically flashing the Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) lights whenever a runway is occupied. • Electronic Flight Bag (EFB) with Moving Map Displays. Using this new technol­ogy, pilots are able to see exactly where their aircraft is on the airfield. LOCAL AIRPORT SoLUTIONS As previously discussed, the federal aviation administration encourages the development of runway safety initiatives at the local level to solve problems that are unique to a particular airport. In addition, participation in information shar­ing at the regional, national, and global levels is encouraged so that successes and lessons learned in one locale can be applied with changes, where appropriate, to other regions. Local airports and regions are encouraged to maintain and update a central information source of newly implemented corrective actions and their effec­tiveness in preventing runway incursions. To promote safer ground operations, the federal aviation administration offers all airports the ability to create their own Websites on which they can post airport-specific information and advisories. Informative booklets on airport basics, operations at towered and non-towered airports, phraseology, and emer­gency procedures are also readily available from the FAA. RUNWAY EXCURSIONS Unlike the unintentional penetration of a runway's protected areas during ground operations, runway excursions are different phenomena altogether and involve more aircraft control during the takeoff and landing phases of flight. The public sometimes associates these events with "running out of runway" during landing, but as the case study in this chapter will illustrate, the phenomena can also be associated with takeoffs. The federal aviation administration defines runway excursions in the National Runway Safety Plan 2015-2017 as, "a veer off or overrun from the run­way surface." Examples of factors associated with runway excursions include the following: • Aircraft that reject their takeoff at speeds above their computed maximum for such operations, perhaps due to a detected malfunction, and which are unable to stop in the available runway. • Aircraft that reject their takeoff at speeds below their computed maximum for such an operation, but which mistakenly do so for reasons associated with mal­functions to their systems that affect their braking ability, such as hydraulic or anti-skid failure annunci ations. • Unstable approaches that result in delayed or excessively fast touchdowns and from which aircraft are unable to stop on the remaining runway. • Landing at wrong airports, wrong runways, or even mistakenly landing on taxi­ways believing that it is a runway, in which insufficient length exists on the sur­face to allow aircraft deceleration prior to stopping. • Losing directional control of an aircraft during takeoff or landing, possibly due to runway contamination, such as ice; or hydroplaning, or an asymmetric thrust condition, such as what is associated with the failure of an engine. Miscalculated aircraft performance data that indicate the aircraft has sufficient runway to takeoff or land, sometimes associated with improper data entry into automated performance calculation systems. aviation safety report system EXAMPLES The airport ramp is a very busy place, as there are multiple activities simultane­ously occurring to get planes in and out of the airport. The aviation safety report system examples below show how the fast-paced environment can have an impact on safety. Ramp Surfaces Title: Concrete parking pad causing taxiing difficulty. Three minutes after landing in Richmond, VA, while taxiing to our assigned Gate, we shut down Engine 2, and continued to single-engine taxi, per Company Policy. As we approached the gate the First Officer (Pilot Monitoring) and I (Pilot Flying) confirmed that all ground equipment was outside the footprint of the ramp area for the gate. We approached at a taxi speed of approxima tely 5 knots, while being directed by the Marshaller, with a wing walker on the left and a wing walker on the right. At approximatel y 5 to 1 0 feet prior to reaching the parking position, the air­craft main tires met with a significant change in the ramp surface level where the ramp surface changes from asphalt to a concrete pad. In other words, there seemed to be a significant "lip" from the edge of the asphalt to the edge of the concrete parking pad used for parking aircraft. When the aircraft main tires reached this point of transition from the asphalt to the concrete at a speed of approxima tely 5 knots or less, the aircraft stopped its forward progress and began to move backwards, whereupon the aircraft brakes were applied, and the aircraft stopped. At this point, the aircraft was not yet at the correct park­ing position. The Marshaller continued to direct us to move forward and thrust was increased on Engine 1 to attempt to move forward across the "lip" between he asphalt ramp and concrete pad. With only Engine 1 operating, we were not able to move the aircraft forward to the correct parking position without using more than the maximum breakaway thrust of 40% N1. An announc ement was made to the passengers and instructions given to remain seated with seat belts fastened until Engine 2 was restarted and the aircraft was properly positioned at the gate. With the aircraft stopped and the parking brake set, we signaled to the Marshaller that we were starting Engine 2. After starting Engine 2, the Marshaller began to direct us to the proper park­ing position. With both engines running, maximum breakaway thrust on both engines (and possibly more) was needed to move the aircraft across the "lip" between the asphalt portion of the ramp area and the concrete parking pad to the proper parking position as directed by the Marshall[er]. The event occurred due to a taxi speed not adequate to allow the aircraft to transition from the asphalt portion of the ramp to the concrete portion of the ramp used as the parking pad. Following this event, after speaking with a Company Customer Service Representative in Richmond, it was learned that repair work to the ramp area in question had been performed on more than one occasion, due to similar events occurring with other aircraft parking at Gate. It is evident that this may be an ongoing issue and concern, at least at this particu­lar gate in Richmond. n addition, this flight segment to Richmond departed late due to an earlier flight we operated in arriving over one hour late. While sensing a need to get the cus­tomers to the gate after landing in Richmond, because the flight departed late and arrived in Richmond late (i.e. "rush to comply"), excessive thrust was used in an attempt to get the aircraft to the parking position and avoid any further delay. Following this event, after careful review and consideration, I am concerned that the course of action taken by me (Pilot Flying) was not in the best interest of safety, especially with regard to the protection of Company personnel and equipment. While being directed by the Marshaller toward the parking position, and while attempting to taxi across the "lip" between the asphalt portion of the ramp and the concrete parking pad using maximum breakaway thrust (and pos­sibly an exceedance of maximum breakaway thrust) first with one engine oper­ating, and then with both engines operating, serious injury to ramp personnel, POD damage to the aircraft engines, and damage to ground equipment in front and behind the aircraft, could have occurred. Thankfully, no personnel were injured, no POD damage occurred in either engine, nor was there any damage to ground equipment in front of or behind the aircraft. In the future, the primary suggestion to myself, or anyone else, to avoid a reoc­currence of this event, or any similar event, is as follows: When an amount of thrust equal to maximum breakaway thrust is not sufficient to move the aircraft into the proper parking position: 1. Do not exceed maximum breakaway thrust in an attempt to reach the parking position. 2. Set the parking brake. 3. Coordinate with Operations/Ground Crew to be towed to the parking position. 4. If required by Company or Local Policy/Procedure, or if requested by Operations or the Ground Crew, shut engine(s) down prior to towing. Discussion question for the reader: If you managed the airfield where this inci­dent occurred, what would you do to prevent a recurrence of the situation? PESKY GROUND VEHICLES Title: Ground vehicles failing to yield to aircraft during taxi. LAX Ramp Tower cleared us to push back. After both engines were started and after the salute/end marshaling signal, the First Officer obtained clearance to taxi to the top of the alleyway. I observed a white van disappear behind the PO's side window. The van appeared to be on our side of the solid white line depict­ing the boundary of the alleyway. As I slowed the aircraft to a stop, the van dis­appeared and a white pickup truck following the same path stopped abeam the First Officer's side window. The PO advised Ramp Tower that we would like all of the ground equipment to move to the terminal side of the white line before proceeding with our taxi. We were stopped for about 20 minutes while one vehicle after another drove into that same spot and stopped apparently oblivious to our attempt to taxi out of the alleyway. After the [first} truck was a catering truck and then a lavatory service truck. Ramp Tower called the company with no help and finally called Airport Operations who sent a sedan with hazard lights to chase the ground vehicles out of the aircraft taxi path. LAX [airport diagram] notes that the alleyway is extremely congested and con­fined. It cautions there is an "extreme jetblast hazard area" and aircraft must remain on the taxiway centerline. The wing tips are not practically visible during taxi from the 7 57 flight deck. There are reference points to predict the path of the aircraft structure, and some of the vehicles appeared low enough and some appeared far enough to avoid collision. However, with at least half a dozen ground vehicles of all different sizes driving and parking fully on our side of the solid white boundary lines there was no way to determine with certainty that ground colli­sion could be avoided or that the drivers were assuring that. So, I did not move the aircraft until all of these vehicles were on the terminal side of the white line. In that 20 minutes numerous aircraft were delayed both inbound and outbound. The drivers and ground employees on foot all seemed oblivious and most never even looked toward our aircraft. They all appeared preoccupied with their own duties. Discussion question for the reader: If you were a safety manager for the airline that experienced this incident, what different actions would you take to prevent a recurrence of the situation ? RuNWAY INCURSION Title: Air traffic controller mentions how airport design led to a runway incursion. It may help to refer to Figure 9-6 and trace what occurred with a pencil when read­ing about this event. This incident occurred at Los Angeles International Airport in California. The expression "rolling out" is used to describe a decelerat ing aircraft after landing touchdo wn. Narrative from air traffic controller: I cleared Aircraft Y for takeoff on Runway 24L. Aircraft X was rolling out on Runway 24R. I took care of other things, and next thing I observed was Aircraft X was about to cross the runway while Aircraft Y was rolling one third down the runway. I yelled out "Aircraft X stop" "Aircraft X hold" then I instructed Aircraft Y to abort and cancel take off clearance. I did not cross Aircraft X, had not expected Aircraft X to cross the runway. I expected all aircraft to hold short of the parallel runway, since there is enough space to clear the runway they just landed. Aircraft Y had to sit on the runway for about 1 0 minutes to heck his aircraft (with help of rescue department ) and taxied off the runway on his own. We need the center taxiway between Runway 24L and Runway 24R. Better educate foreign pilots to what they can and cannot do after landing. Narrative from the departing aircraft that had to abort takeoff: Cleared for takeoff 24L E8 shortened. As we taxied onto runway, an aircraft was rolling out on 24R. We began the takeoff roll as the aircraft was exiting onto AA. After 80 kt callout the CA questioned whether the aircraft was stop­ping short of 24L. We both noted that the aircraft was not stopping and the Captain called to abort the takeoff at approxima tely 110 kts. Immediately there­after, tower told the crossing aircraft to "stop, stop" and called for us to abort the takeoff. The traffic had not received a clearance to cross 24L but failed to hold short of the runway. After the rejected takeoff, we remained on the runway until aircraft rescue and firefighting inspected [us] for damage. No damage noted. Returned to gate for further inspection by maintenance. Discussion questions for the reader: Why would the presence of a center taxiway between Runway 24L and 24R reduce the chances of a runway incursion? What type of damage would aircraft rescue and firefighting search for on an aircraf t after a high-speed rejected takeoff? CASE STUDY: PSA AIRLINES FLIGHT 2495 As has been shown throughout this book, the safety value chain that protects commercial aviation against accidents and serious incidents is long and has been devel­oped over a century of effort. It extends from the design of aircraft and airports all the way to the training of frontline personnel, such as air traffic controllers and pilots. The elements of the safety value chain work well together, and sometimes one protection will kick in when another one fails. The case study contained in this section is a perfect example. PSA Airlines Flight 2495 illustrates how the conscientious actions that airports take to improve safety can truly be lifesavers when safety breaks down in other areas. On January 19, 2010, a PSA Airlines Bombardier CRJ 200 jet was scheduled to depart from Yeager Airport in Charleston, West Virginia for Charlotte, North Carolina. Everything leading up to the takeoff on Runway 23 seemed normal. However , when the pilots reached the 80 knot callout, the captain realized that the flaps were not configured properly on the plane. He tried to correct the settings of the flaps, but this prompted an airplane warning . As a result, the captain decided to abort the takeoff. The plane was unable to stop within the runway confines and was forcibly stopped 130 feet into the 455-foot-long Engineered Materials Arrestor System (EMAS). EMAS is a safety measure used in locations where there is not enough space to have a standard 1,000 foot overrun for aircraft. It is made of crushable concrete that collapses under the weight of the plane, thus stopping the aircraft's motion to prevent a crash or running off the runway. Figure 9-7 shows the PSA Airlines plane shortly after being stopped by the EMAS area at Yeager Airport. ll 34 passengers left the accident uninjured, and despite the appearance of the jet in Figure 9-7, there was only minor damage to the plane's flaps, landing gear, and landing gear doors. However , had it not been for the EMAS, the sever­ity of the accident would have been much worse, probably even fatal. Having the EMAS in place offered the protection that the airplane needed against the runway overrun. What makes this accident unique though is that Yeager Airport is built on the top of a cleared mountain. When the airport was planning an airport runway extension project to comply with new federal aviation administration regulations, they were faced with a particular challenge . There was not enough room to extend the runway the required distance since there was a steep slope that consisted of loose sediments rock. As a result, the Central West Virginia Regional Airport Authority had to make special considerations to ensure that aircraft had a big enough safety area. Thus, the Airport decided that they needed to construct an EMAS. Prior to the installment of the EMAS in 2007, the runway safety area was only about 120 feet long. Had this still been the case, the PSA Airlines plane would have endured a dif­ferent fate. Figure 9-8 shows an airport diagram for Charleston and a close-up of a part of the diagram depicting the location of the EMAS on the departure end of Runway 23. This accident highlights the importance of addressi ng safety risks in a com­plex environment . These tasks require careful considerations by professionals in the industry. As we can see with the case study, the airport was aware of the mplications involved with a runway that ended right before a steep drop-off. Their effort to install an EMAS shows how they proactively turned this unsafe condition into a safe environment . Even though at the time of the accident, one 2-foot-thick, 4-by-4 foot block used in the EMAS system cost around $1,000 each, it was well worth the repair costs when you consider everyone left the acci­dent uninjured. CONCLUSIONS As this chapter has illustrated, there are diverse and complex activities happening simultaneously at any airport open to commercial aviation operatio ns. Airports involve everything both inside the airport building and on the ramp, extending out to the runways and even the areas adjacent to the airport when considering wildlife hazards. Due to this vast purview, airports must be designed and operated with several lines of defenses for safety. All of them together add greatly to the safety value chain for commercial operations. Airport certification, as outlined in FAR Part 139, entails achieving an Airport Operating Certificate (AOC) and then being subject to periodic and occasional no­notice inspections by the FAA. Fully certificated airports must maintain an Airport Certification Manual (ACM) that stipulates, among many requirement s, having an updated Airport Emergency Plan. The plan must be reviewed at least annually, and for Class I airports there must be a full-scale exercise of the plan every 3 years. Detailed procedures must be created and followed to manage risks associated with the varied operations found at airports, ranging from aircraft rescue and firefighting response capabilities to the storing and handling of flammable and combustible liquids. Fuel safety is a key respon­sibility of airports, both from the perspective of airport employees and the commercial operations that they service. Fuels can affect the central nervous system of ground personnel by causing narcosis through exposure. As for aircraft, in much the same way that blood poisoning can cause a human to die, a perfectly functioning engine can be rendered completely unusable, sometimes in mid-flight, due to fuel contamination. ivil aviation's worst disaster was at Tenerife in 1977 due to a runway incursion, but thankfully incursions are rare, and incursions leading to collisions that result in deaths are even more infrequent. Numerous initiatives have been established to miti­gate the risk of runway incursions and, of more recent attention, runway excursions. The case study of PSA Airlines Flight 2495 illustrates how one safety system can make up for a deficiency in another part of aviation operations. Regulatory guid­ance, such as contained in federal aviation administration FAR Part 139, is indeed critical to the aviation safety rofessional and sets the standard for modern commercial airport safety systems. KEY TERMS Aircraft Rescue and Firefighting (ARFF) Airport Airport Certification Manual Airport Emergency Plan irport Operating Certificate Airport Surface Detection Equipment, Model X (ASDE-X) Airport Movement Area Safety System (AMASS) American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) American National Standards Institute (ANSI) CertAlerts Electronic Flight Bag (EFB) Engineered Materials Arrestor System (EMAS) federal aviation administration Advisory Circulars Final Approach Runway Occupancy Signal (FAROS) rounding National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Operational Incident Pilot Deviation Runway Incursion Runway Status Lights (RWSL} Vehicle/Pedestrian Deviation REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. Which act was responsible for initiating the airport certification process and what were its salient features? 2. What federal aviation administration FAR part number regulates airport certificati on? What are its high-lights, and when was it first promulgate d? 3. Discuss the highlights of the airport certification process and their significance. 4. What are the four classes of airport certifications and what are their differences? 5. What is the Airport Certification Manual and why is it so significant? 6. List at least five elements required in the Airport Certification Manual. 7. List and explain the required elements of an Airport Emergency Plan. . List five safety hazards associated with each of the following : a. Airport terminal buildings b. Hangars and maintenance shops c. Ramp operations . Aviation fuel handling e. Aircraft rescue and firefighting (ARFF) f. Deicing and Anti-icing 9. What is a runway incursion? 10. List and explain the different categories of runway incursions . 11. Differentiate between runway excursions and runway incursions. 12. List individual groups together with their functions and the equipment they use for airport surface operation s. 13. Explain why aircraft deicing may be required even in temperate climates such as in Los Angeles.