Title: Commercial Aviation Safety– Chapter 13 Author(s): Stephen K. Cusick; Antonio I. Cortes; Clarence C. Rodrigues Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, Accidents Chapter 13 PROTECTION FROM INTENTIONAL HARM (SECURITY) INTRODUCTION "Security" and "safety" are often used by the public as interchangeable terms and sometimes are even considered synonymous topics. In modern society, the discus­sion of one invariably invokes references to the other. However, it is important to realize that there is a fundamental difference between the two terms. While the end objective of both safety and security is to prevent injuries, loss of life, and property damage by minimizing risk, safety practices are designed to prevent "unintentional" acts and harm whereas security practices are designed to avert "intentional" acts and harm. The intentional acts addressed in this chapter are focused on attacks against commercial aviation. While attacks on civil aviation can be carried out against airliners, airports, and airline offices, airliners have been the most common target for attacks. The spectrum of attacks on civil aviation includes the following: • Bombings, shooting, and other attacks at airports • Bombings, shooting, hijackings, and other attacks (e.g., commandeering) on air-craft on the ground or in flight • General-aviation and charter-aviation aircraft attacks • Off-airport facility attacks, such as to navigation airborne integrated data system or communication relays • Shootings (from the ground) at aircraft during takeoff and landing • Virtual or cybernetic attacks from remote locations An example of how a large-scale attack by a highly trained group of terrorists can completely bring commercial aviation to its knees occurred on September 11, 2001, when al-Qaeda carried out four simultaneous and closely coordinated suicide hijacking attacks. Later that year, al Qaeda announced that its number one goal was to incapacitate the U.S. economy. Although this was not the first act of terrorism directed toward airlines, it proved particularly detrimental to the global economy. Some of the financial repercussions associated with attacks on the airline industry include the need to reallocate resources to enhance security measures and the crippling of air transportation systems, all at an enormous cost to the airline industry. As we move into the next era of aviation, we expect to see more of a relatively new type of violence to emerge: the cyberattack. We therefore need to start thinking about not only protecting the physical components of the system, such as planes, people, and facilities, but also consider the security of technology, such as software and digital information. Cyberattack threats will pose a new set of challenges for keeping our airspace secure. In this chapter, we review the history of attacks against commercial aviation together with the regulations and security measures that have evolved to minimize the occurrence and severity of these attacks. Figure 13-1 shows TSA inspectors patrolling airside ramp gates at an airport. REVIEW OF ATTACKS ON CIVIL AVIATION The first significant attack on commercial aviation dates back to 1930 when Peruvian revolutionaries seized a Fokker F-7 aircraft in South America. The incident received little attention and never resulted in any international effort to com­bat potential threats to international aviation. At the time of ICAO's formation in Chicago in 1944, few foresaw aviation security threats as significant, and hence, it was not addressed. Until the mid-1960s, airlines and airports gave security mat­ters little attention. Low-technology security measures, such as airport fences, were intended as a safety measure to separate aircraft from wildlife rather than terrorists. In the United States, only 12 commercial aircraft hijackings were attempted from 1930 to 1967, of which only seven were semi-successful (Dorey, 1987), and there were only 32 worldwide hij ackings from 1961 through 1967. However, attacks against civil aviation rose rapidly in the late 1960s and 1970s. In 1968 there was a surge of hijackings in the United States in which several flights traveling to the Caribbean were repeatedly detoured to Havana, Cuba. Of the 22 hijackings in 1968, 19 of these flights were redirected to Cuba. There were 290 hijacking attempts (suc­cessful and unsuccessful) worldwide during the 4 years following 1968. The worst year occurred in 1969 when 33 regularly scheduled U.S. airliners were hijacked (seven of these attempts failed). By 1969, the number of U.S. passengers and crew­members who were being detoured to Cuba totaled 1,359 (Moore, 1991). 7 to 1996 there were 1 ,098 total incidents of attacks on airliners, From 194 compared with 129 attacks on airports and 249 attacks on airline offices. Unlike attacks on airliners, attacks on airports (bombing and armed assaults) peaked in the 1977-1 986 decade. With regard to the modes of attack, hijackings were by far the most common form of attack on commercial aviation. Hijackings consti­tuted 87% (959 of 1,098) of all incidents on airliners during this 50-year period. The other significant forms of attack on airliners were bombings (on the ground or in midflight) and armed assault (shooting at aircraft on the ground or in flight, throwing hand grenades, etc.). Throughout those key decades of the 1960s through 1980s, the overall number of attacks against commercial aviation were on a decline, but the severity of these attacks grew increasingly worse. In fact, the 1980s can be considered a disastrous decade for commercial aviation security, since 25 planes were sabotaged by explosives, causing 1,237 casualties. Some of the more infamous incidents included the following: • Air India Flight 1 82 in 1985 was a Boeing 747 that exploded due to a bomb, causing the death of 329 people off the coast of Ireland. • The Korean Air Flight 858 disaster in 1987 in which 1 1 5 lost their lives due to a terrorist bomb exploding on a Boeing 707 in Asia. • Pan Am Flight 103 was an infamous bombing of a Boeing 747 in 1988 caused by a Libyan terrorist bomb in the baggage compartment over Lockerbie, Scotland (270 fatalities). • The bombing of UTA Flight 772 in 1989 over the Niger desert in Africa in which 171 were killed. • The bombing of Avianca Flight 203 in 1989 near Bogota in which 107 people died. In addition to these attacks, there were 17 other documented, failed attempts between 1982 and 1987, as noted in the President's 1989 Commission Report on Aviation Security and Terrorism. By comparison, there were 650 deaths in the 1970s and 286 deaths in the 1960s. Things cooled off in the 1990s only to give way to the events of September 11 , 2001, when 2,996 victims were killed in the four separate terrorist acts that will be discussed later in this chapter. The increased severity of attacks on commercial aviation were the results of terrorists changing their tactics and philosophies and making use of new tech­nologies. They gained access to more sophisticated and lethal technologies, such as automatic weapons and deadly plastic explosives. They attacked airports by using pistols and bazookas, and they developed numerous ingenious ways to turn innocuous-looking suitcases and radios into lethal bombs. The character of airline hijackings also changed from the lone hijacker of the early 1960s who was making a personal or political point to an organized terrorist tactic in the 1970s. In the era leading up to September 11, 2001, hijacking for the most part did not usually cost the lives of hostages. The operating security philosophy was to negotiate with the hijackers until a peaceful settlement was reached, thereby minimizing casualties. One particularly memorable event in commercial aviation security history took place in June and July 1976 and is best known as Operation Entebbe. On July 4, 1976, an Air France Airbus 300 aircraft with 248 passengers aboard was success­fully rescued from hijackers associated with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. The terrorists' intent was to force the release of Palestinians and militants imprisoned by Israel in exchange for the hostages. The flight had started in Tel Aviv with a destination of Paris but was diverted to numerous locations before stopping at Entebbe, which was the main airport in the African country of Uganda. Although 148 non-Israeli hostages were released, 94 mostly Israeli passengers and the Air France crewmembers remained hostages and were at grave risk of being killed. In response, the Israel Defense Forces transported 100 commandos over 2,500 miles to effect a daring night-time rescue mission in Entebbe. After a week of planning, the 90-minute raid rescued 102 hostages, but unfortunately cost the life of the Israeli unit commander and three hostages. All the hijackers were killed (Dunstan, 2011). Figure 13-2 shows the moment when the released hostages made it to freedom. During the following decade, hijackings have been largely unsuccessful, and aircraft defenses have significantly improved. Flight attendants and pilots now receive extensive anti-hij acking training. Passengers have also helped prevent terrorists from igniting explosives, such as during the shoe bombing attempt of December 22, 2001, and the underwear bombing attempt of December 25, 2009. Hijackers have been arrested and brought to justice in nearly every incident since September 11 , 2001. REGULATORY MOVEMENT The terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 changed the Aviation Security (AVSEC) landscape across the globe on a permanent basis. There have been sig­nificant regulatory developments in the international arena and in U.S. policy along the way. The international developments will be discussed briefly, followed by a historical discussion of the evolution of aviation security in the United States. INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE TO TERRORISM As stated above, no one considered aviation security as a major issue at the time of the formation of international civil aviation organization at the Chicago Convention in 1944. The focus at that time was the planning and development of air transport to ensure safety of flight in international air navigation. Gradually, through a series of international civil aviation organization meetings and conferences, the international community began to focus on crimes committed onboard aircraft. Some major milestones of international aviation security include the following: • Tokyo Convention recognized the issues underlying offenses and certain other acts committed on board aircraft ( 1963) and authorized the airline captain to take appropriate action to restrain persons interfering with safety of flight. • Hague Convention, for the suppression of unlawful seizure of aircraft ( 1970), adopted 14 articles relating to hijacking and provided guidelines to governments dealing with this problem. • International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Annex 17-SARP (Standard and Recommended Practice) entitled "Security-Safeguarding International Civil Aviation against Acts of Unlawful Interference" ( 1974 ) . This SARP sets forth the basis for the international civil aviation organization Civil Aviation Security program and outlines the mini­mum standards for aviation security worldwide. It has been a living document, evolving with security problems around the world. international civil aviation organization Security Manual­(Doc 8973-restricted) is the primary document providing member States with guidance material to assist with the implementation of international security measures. The ninth edition is the most recent version and includes national organization and administration; recruitment, selection, and training; airport security, organization, program, and design requirements; preventive security measures; and crisis management and response to acts of unlawful interference. In recent years, international civil aviation organization has been deeply involved in strengthening worldwide aviation security. Some current developments are provided below; for future updates please visit www.icao.int/security. • During a United Nations Security Council meeting in September 2016, the group unanimously adopted UN Resolution 2309 (2016), which calls for closer collab­oration to ensure the safety of all global air services and prevent terrorist attacks. To counter the ongoing danger posed by terrorism to civil aviation, the Security Council called on all States to work with each other and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) to continuously adapt measures to meet that "ever-evolving global threat" (www.un.org) . • Along with enhanced screening, security checks, and facility security, the UN Security Council called for strengthened cooperation and information-sharing among States and a requirement that airlines provide advance passenger infor­mation to national authorities in order to track the movement of individuals identified by the counter terrorism committees. Regional and international cooperation on border control, law-enforcement, and criminal justice was also emphasized. • One of the major features of worldwide security is the international civil aviation organization Universal Security Audit Programme Continuous Monitoring Approach (USAP-CMA), which has an ongoing objective to promote global aviation security through continuous auditing and monitoring of member States' aviation security performance. • The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO ), International Air Transport Association (lATA), and Airports Council International (ACI) jointly convened the 25th AVSEC World Conference in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia from October 25 to 27, 2016. More than 450 security representatives from around the world exchanged ideas and operational experiences, learned practical new skills, and put together the framework to create the future of aviation security. • lATA Security Management System (SeMS). This system sets out an organiza­tion's security policies as an integral part of its business processes. SeMS is based on the same concepts used for Safety Management System (SMS). Developed in conjunction with an efficient threat assessment mechanism and risk management program, SeMS helps organizations develop proactive, efficient, and cost­effective security measures (www.iata.org). EvoLUTION OF AVIATION SECURITY IN THE UNITED STATES Similar to ICAO, the federal aviation administration response to aviation security has slowly evolved. This section will briefly discuss the history of aviation security in the United States and the changes brought about by the events of September 11 , 2001 . THE HIJACKING ERA ( 1968-1987). In response to the major increase in hijackings during this era, federal aviation administration began to beef up the Federal Aviation Regulations. Initially, airport security matters were governed under FAR Part 139. Part 139 was mainly concerned with deterring mistaken entry of humans and animals into air opera­tions areas. However, to stem the increase of hijackings during the 1970s, there was a need to specifically deter access to air operations areas by individuals and ground vehicles that were unauthorized to do so. The anti-hijacking preventive measures ultimately approved were expensive, but so were the acts that were being prevented. Figure 13-3 shows a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) Team practicing an anti-hijacking response. AIR CARRIER SECURITY. On January 3 1 , 1972, Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) 121.538 was issued to cover the air carrier community. Within this rule, air carriers were required to adopt and implement a screening system that would detect weap­ons and explosives in carry-on baggage or worn by passengers. The carrier's secu­rity program was required to do the following: • Prevent or deter unauthorized access to its aircraft • Ensure that a responsible agent or representative of the airline would check in baggage • Prevent cargo and checked baggage from being loaded aboard its aircraft unless they were handled in accordance with the certificate holder's security procedures The Anti-hijacking or Air Transportation Security Act of 1 974 provided the statutory basis for the rules requiring carriers to institute 100% screening of pas­senger and carry-on items and for airport operators to station at least one law enforcement officer at each passenger checkpoint during boarding and pre-board­ing. Additionally, as part of its obligation under this Act, the federal aviation administration began a research and development program that emphasized the development of devices to protect air travelers against acts of criminal violence and aircraft piracy. Airlines not only had complete discretion on how they implemented these new requirements but also had the right to express their concerns and suggest changes based on trial and error. This resulted in the inconsistent application of regulations across the airline industry, and in early 1975, the Air Transportation Association sought to work out a single standard security program. Their effort produced the FAA's Air Carrier Standard Security Program, which attempted to bring some structure to the diverse interpretations of the new rules. Today, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has continued this program now known as the Aircraft Operations Standard Security Program (AOSSP). The increase in the rate of hijackings during the late 1 960s and early 1970s caused the public to exert pressure on the U.S. government to implement security procedures at airports and to mandate security requirements for U.S. air carriers. This resulted in the establishment of the Anti-Hijacking Program of the Federal Aviation Administration. One element of this program was the federal Air Marshal Program, which began as the Sky Marshal Program in 1968 and continued through the 1970s and part of the 1980s as a program that was initially instituted to stop hijackings to and from Cuba, given the dramatic political events that had taken place on the island in 1959 and subsequent years. The Air Marshal Program gained importance, however, after the hijacking of TWA Flight 847 in June 1985 when two Lebanese hijacked a Boeing 727 departing from Athens and diverted it to Beirut, where they were joined by additional hijackers. During an excruciatingly long 2-week confrontation, the hijackers demanded the release of prisoners held by Israel and murdered Robert Stethem, a U.S. Navy diver who was a passenger aboard the plane. In response to this hostage nightmare and the rapid surge in the Middle East terrorism, President Ronald Reagan directed the Secretary of Transportation, in cooperation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, to immediately explore an expansion of the FAA's armed Air Marshal Program aboard interna­tional flights for U.S. air carriers. On August 8, 1985, Congress enacted Public Law 99-83, the International Security and Development Cooperation Act, which estab­lished the explicit statutory basis for the federal aviation administration Federal Air Marshal Program and allowed for assessment of security at foreign airports and approval of foreign air carrier security programs. This statute authorized Federal Air Marshals to carry firearms on board and to make arrests without warrant for any offense against the United States commit­ted in their presence, if they had reasonable basis to believe that the person to be arrested had committed or was committing a felony. Three weeks after the TWA Flight 847 hijacking, the federal aviation administration imposed new regulations requiring that all sched­uled carriers and public charter operators carry Federal Air Marshals on a prior­ity basis, without charge, and that they provide seating selected by the marshals, even though it might mean bumping full-fare passengers. Today TSA has assumed responsibility for the Federal Air Marshal Service whose mission is to detect, deter, and defeat hostile acts targeting U.S. air carriers, airports, passengers, and crews. Figure 13-4 shows air marshals in rigorous hand-to-hand combat training. THE BoMBING ERA ( 1988-2000). On December 21 , 1988 , Pan Am Flight 103 exploded over the village of Lockerbie, Scotland, killing the 259 people aboard and 11 people on the ground, as well as damaging several residential buildings. As previously noted, the crash was due to the explosion of a terrorist bomb placed in the luggage compartment of the aircraft. It was asserted that the luggage was coming from passengers boarding in Frankfurt and from some possible suitcases trans­ferred from Air Malta Flight 180 to Pan Am Flight 103 at the Frankfurt Airport. Figure 13-5 shows some of the many pieces of debris that were scattered across parts of Scotland due to the high-altitude explosion that tore the aircraft apart. The major lesson learned from the Pan Am tragedy is the importance of rec­onciling baggage to passengers, which is sometimes called bag matching. U.S. carriers were required to conduct a positive baggage-passenger reconciliation in 1988 at designated international locations. According to investigation findings, the Pan Am tragedy occurred because the airline was x-raying all interline bags at certain international high-threat locations instead of conducting a reconciliation process and physically searching all unaccompanied bags. Because Pan Am did not identify and physically search all the unaccompanied interline bags, Flight 103 left Frankfurt with several extra bags, one of which contained a bomb. This failure was duly noted in the 1 990 report of the United States' Presidential Commission on Aviation Security and Terrorism, established in the aftermath of the disaster. The commission's mandate was to comprehensively study and evaluate the practices and policy options with respect to preventing terrorist acts involving aviation. The commission made a number of recommendations to prevent the recurrence of such a tragedy. The Aviation Security Improvement Act of 1990 (U.S. Public Law 101-604), passed on November 16, 1990, implemented many of the recommendations of the commission. This Act has been described in the 1992 federal aviation administration Annual Report to Congress as perhaps the most comprehensive, far­reaching legislative initiative designed to improve all aspects of aviation security. It mandated many regulatory actions affecting several agencies, required new reports, created new organizations and staffing requirements, and empowered the federal aviation administration to promote and strengthen aviation security through an expedited, more focused research and development (R&D) program. WHITE HousE CoMMISSION oN AviATION SAFETY AND SECURITY, 1996. The late 1990s wit­nessed significant changes in the direction and emphasis of aviation security in the United States. The triggering event for this new emphasis and importance was the catastrophic loss of TWA Flight 800 off Long Island, New York, in July 1996. The early model Boeing 747 was carrying 230 passengers and crew when it exploded minutes after departing John F. Kennedy International Airport, bound for Paris. The tremendous force of the explosion had torn the aircraft apart, and the disturbing recovery images, along with vivid eyewitness accounts, riveted the attention of a shocked U.S. public for many weeks fearing that a terrorist attack had occurred. Curiously, the FBI eventually ruled that TWA 800 was not the result of a terrorist act. Both the national transportation safety board and FBI jointly investigated the event until it was ruled a matter of safety and not security, at which point the national transportation safety board finished the investigation. Nevertheless, the traveling public was frightened, and the media questioned the perceived safety and security of domestic airline operations. Within weeks, President Clinton announced the creation of the White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security (the Gore Commission) which outlined sweep­ing changes, calling for regulatory reform and additional research directed toward new, safer technologies. Special attention was given to an action plan to deploy new, high-technology machines to detect the most sophisticated explo­sives. The report included 57 recommendations, 31 dealing with improvements in security for the traveling public. The commission recommended that the federal government consider aviation security a national security concern. GLOBAL WAR ON TERRORISM (2001 To PRESENT). On September 11 , 2001, four passenger aircraft were hijacked and crashed by terrorists in a coordinated attack against the United States of America. The terrorist events of 2001 changed the face of aviation forever while fundamentally modifying the thinking and approach to security in the United States. The ramifications of the attacks extend beyond trends and mea­sures of security in aviation and into all modes of transportation. The first airplane used in the attacks was American Airlines 767 (Flight 11), which was flying from Boston to Los Angeles when it was hijacked and flown into one of the World Trade Center towers. All 11 crewmembers, 76 passengers, and 5 hijackers were killed. The second jet that was crashed into the second World Trade Center tower was United Airlines 767 (Flight 175). All 9 crewmembers, 51 passengers, and 5 hijackers were killed. The impacts against the towers, together with the heat generated from the explosion of the aircraft, caused both towers to collapse. The third aircraft was American Airlines 757 (Flight 77) on a flight from Dulles to Los Angeles. It was hijacked and flown into the Pentagon, collapsing part of the structure. All 6 crewmembers, 53 passengers, and 5 hijackers were killed. The fourth aircraft was United Airlines 757 (Flight 93) on a flight from Newark to San Francisco. It was hijacked and crashed into a field near Pittsburgh. All 7 crewmembers, 34 passengers, and 4 hijackers were killed. Figure 13-6 shows fire­fighters extinguishing the fire from the impact of the hijacked aircraft that crashed into the Pentagon at approximately 9:30 in the morning of September 11 , 2001 . Next, the U.S. response to these attacks will b e discussed. THE 9-11 CoMMISSION. The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States (the 9-11 Commission) was an independent, bipartisan commission created by Congress and the President to prepare a full and complete account of the circumstances surrounding the terrorist attacks, and to provide recommenda­tions designed to guard against future attacks. The full comprehensive report of the commission was issued on July 22, 2004, consisting of 585 pages. The execu­tive summary of the report, which is available on the 9-11 Commission's Web site, outlines sweeping general and specific findings, plus numerous recommendations (www.9-11commission.gov). General findings: • Imagination. The most important failure was one of imagination. The Commission did not believe national leaders understood the gravity of the ter­rorist threat. • Policy. Terrorism was not the overriding national security concern for the U.S. government. • Capabilities. The United States tried to solve the al-Qaeda problem with old, insufficient, Cold War capabilities. • Management. The United States missed opportunities to thwart the 9-11 plot, and could not find a way to pool intelligence information. Specific weakness and adverse findings were made by the 9-11 Commission in the following areas: • Unsuccessful diplomacy. • Lack of military options. • Problems within the intelligence community. • Problems in the FBI. • Permeable borders and immigration controls. • Permeable aviation security system. • Al-Qaeda financing was not detected. • The United States had an improvised homeland defense and communication was poor at senior government levels. • Emergency response was determined and saved lives, but effective decision making in New York was hampered by poor communication and weak command and control. • Congress and the Executive Branch responded slowly to the rise of the transna­tional terrorism threat. • The Commission stated that at the time of the report (2004), the United States was more secure than on September 11, 2001, but even more measures could be taken; therefore, recommendations were issued as follows. The 9-11 Commission recommended that the United States should take the following steps: 1. Attack terrorists and their organizations 2. Prevent the continued growth of Islamic terrorism 3. Protect against and prepare for future terrorist attacks The 9-11 Commission specifically recommended the following: 1. Creation of a National Counterterrorism Center 2. Creation of a new National Intelligence Director 3. Effective sharing of information across U.S. government agency boundaries 4. Congressional action to improve oversight of homeland security 5. Clarification of roles, missions, and authority between Department of Defense (DoD ) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) officials among other agenCies TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION On November 1 9 , 200 1 , Congress enacted the Aviation and Transportation Security Act (ATSA), Public Law 107-71, 1 1 5 Stat. 597, which established the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) as an operating administration within the Department of Transportation (DOT). A year later, on November 28, 2002, Congress enacted the Homeland Security Act Public Law 107-296, 1 1 7 Stat. 745, which created the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and is headed by a cabinet-level secretary. The TSA subsequently moved from the DOT to the DHS in March 2003 as part of a massive federal government integration of all agencies whose mission it was to prepare for, respond to, and protect the United States from domestic emergencies, especially terrorism. According to its Web site, the mission of the TSA is to protect the nation's transportation systems to ensure freedom of movement for people and commerce. Security screening is at the heart of the TSA, which now numbers approximately well over 50,000 employees. The TSA conducts 100% passenger screening and handled 708 million people in 2015. The multiple layers of the TSA aviation secu­rity system include the following: • Airport document checkers. • Behavior detection officers. • Secure flight-the behind-the-scenes watch list which matches passenger names to government lists of suspected terrorists. • Federal Air Marshals who fly aboard selected U.S. commercial aircraft. • Federal Flight Deck Officers (FFDOs) who are pilots armed and trained by the Federal Air Marshal Service on the use of firearms and other tactics. • Crewmember self-defense training program available at over 20 sites across the country. • Mobile dog explosive detection teams, such as the one shown in Figure 13-7. • Air cargo programs and initiatives such as the Certified Cargo Screening program to allow the prescreening of cargo prior to arrival at the airport. This program is part of the Improving America's Security Act of 2007, Public Law 110-53, which implements the ambitious 9-11 Commission recommendation mandating 100% inspection of all air and sea cargo entering the United States. TSA REGULATIONS The TSA issues Transportation Security Regulations (TSRs), which are codified in 49 code of federal regulations Chapter XII, Parts 1500 through 1699. TSA regulations are broken out into subchapters. Subchapter A contains administrative and procedural rules. Subchapter B contains rules that apply to many modes of transportation. Rules for civil aviation security are contained in Subchapter C. Subchapter A, 49 code of federal regulations 1 500, outlines and defines the terms used in the TSRs. • Part 1520 addresses the protection of sensitive security information. This part outlines the type of information that may not be released under the Freedom of Information Act. Contained in this section is the duty to protect any information that is given to a person in performance of his or her duties and the responsibil­ity to report to TSA, DHS, or DOT when he or she becomes aware that sensitive security information has been released to unauthorized individuals. • Part 1540 outlines the Civil Aviation Security General Rules. Part 1540 also con­tains prohibitions regarding making fraudulent or intentionally false statements or entries in compliance reports. Also prohibited by Part 1540 is the interference with screening personnel while they are performing their duties and the carriage of weapons, explosives, or incendiaries by individuals into specified areas at air­ports. Other requirements outlined in Part 1 540 are as follows: • The security responsibilities of employees and persons who access the airport • The responsibilities of persons who wish to enter any area that requires screenmg • The responsibility of airmen to present certain certifications to TSA for inspection when so requested • Part 1 542 contains the regulations for airport security. These airport require­ments primarily address access control, law enforcement support, and finger-print-based criminal-history records checks, among other things. • Part 1544 addresses airport operator security for air carriers and commercial operators. Part 1544 requires that the aircraft operator not permit persons to have unauthorized explosives, incendiaries, or weapons when on board an aircraft. • Part 1546 provides the rules for foreign air carrier security including the screening of individuals and property, access to cargo, and bomb or air piracy threats. • Part 1548 provides the rules for indirect air carriers that operate within the United States, including the acceptance of cargo and security threat assessments. • Part 1550 was created to require security programs for both passenger and all-cargo operations using aircraft with a maximum certified takeoff weight of 12,500 pounds or more. ROLE OF INTELLIGENCE The comprehensive 9-11 Commission Report details how ai-Qaeda was allowed to become a real danger to the United States in the years preceding 2001 . The attack was driven by Osama bin Laden, who built a dynamic and lethal terrorist organization over the course of a decade. The Report surprisingly concludes that "the 9-11 attacks were a shock, but they should not have come as a surprise." The terrorists had given plenty of warning that they meant to kill Americans in great numbers. With 20/20 hindsight, it is clear that the 9-11 attacks were able to suc­ceed due to a serious failure of the U.S. intelligence community. NATIONAL CouNTERTERRORISM CENTER A major recommendation of the 9-11 Commission was to build a "Unity of Effort" combining all strategic intelligence and operational planning under one office. The National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) was established by Presidential Executive Order 13354 in August 2004. This order was codified into law by the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (IRTPA). The estab­lishment of NCTC implements a key recommendation of the 9-11 Commission as follows: Breaking the older mold of national government organization, this NCTC should be a center for joint operational planning and joint intelligence, staffed by personnel from the various agencies. (9-11 Commission Report, p. 403) Today, the NCTC is manned on a 24x7 basis in a modern operations center collocated with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) operations centers. It is staffed by more than 500 personnel from over 1 6 different U.S. departments and agencies. The Director of NCTC has a unique, dual line of reporting: ( 1 ) to the President for counterterrorism plan­ning and (2) to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) regarding intelligence matters. The DNI began operations on April 22, 2005 as another major recom­mendation of the 9-11 Commission and the IRTPA legislation was implemented on that date. Today, the Director of National Intelligence serves as the single head of the intelligence community, overseeing such major intelligence offices as follows: • The Central Intelligence Agency • The Defense Intelligence Agency • The National Security Agency • The National Reconnaissance Office As stated on its Web site, the NCTC has a threefold mission to lead the effort to combat terrorism at home and abroad: 1. Analyzing the threat 2. Sharing information with intelligence partners 3. Integrating all instruments of national power to ensure unity of effort National Counterterrorism Center analyzes the threat by integrating all coun­terterrorism intelligence from across the community, producing detailed analytic products such as the following: • President's Daily Brief • National Terrorism Bulletin • Information on the chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threats National Counterterrorism Center shares information with U.S. intelligence agencies by conducting analysis of more than 30 dedicated intelligence networks located under one roof. It routinely makes these counterterrorism products avail­able to the following: • Intelligence users in 75 U.S. government agencies through the NCTC Interagency Threat Analysis and Coordination Group • Intelligence users also obtain information by means of a daily secure video teleconference system on a 24x7, 365 days a year basis National Counterterrorism Center integrates all instruments of national power in the Global War on Terrorism through joint planning and strategic plans such as the following: • The National Implementation Plan for the War on Terror • The National Strategy for Aviation Security DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY The National Strategy for Aviation Security cited above details the comprehen­sive U.S. government strategy in this area. The DHS coordinates the operational implementation of this strategy, which is an overarching national plan to optimize aviation security integration on a government-wide basis. Six supporting plans, listed below, have been issued to ensure collaborative interagency effort. (Please see www.dhs.gov for the latest information.) 1. Aviation Transportation System Security Plan (DHS and DOT) 2. Aviation Operational Threat Response Plan (DoD and DoJ) 3. Aviation Transportation System Recovery Plan (DHS and DOT) 4. Air Domain Surveillance and Intelligence Integration Plan (DoD and DNI) 5. Domestic Outreach Plan (DHS and DOT) 6. International Outreach Plan (DOS) REVIEW OF SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES To strengthen commercial aviation security, numerous technologies have been fielded and others are under development. The first stage of the deployment of new, advanced security equipment began in 1997 when Congress appropriated $ 144 million to this end. After the events of September 11, 2001 , the implementation plan was sped up, and all airports were required to install baggage and passenger screening equipment by December 2002. TSA began deploying state-of-the-art Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT) in 2007. In March 2010, TSA started deploying AIT units which were purchased under the $ 1 billion appropriation to TSA, authorized by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act jobs program brought about by the worldwide recession of 2009-2010. Protection from the threat of explosives is of particular interest and has been pursued in two general ways: by preventing explosives from reaching the aircraft, such as by using explosives detection technologies, or by mitigating the effects of an explosive by protecting the aircraft from an onboard explosion such as via aircraft hardening and hardened containers. While each of these approaches will be discussed individually, a combination of these two approaches may provide the best protection of commercial aviation. In some cases, technologies can be used for detecting several threats, such as imaging detectors that search for explosives, knives, and firearms. IMAGING TECHNOLOGIES Imaging technologies work either by sensing the natural radiation emitted by the human body (millimeter wave) or by exposing subjects to a specific type of radia­tion and then measuring the radiation reflected by the body (backscatter). These systems can detect metallic weapons or plastic explosives by sensing the differences in reflected radiation between the human body and the weapons or explosives. The screening systems then generate television-like digital images. Operators are trained to identify potential threat objects in these images, often with the assistance of image-enhancing software that highlights unusual features. Figure 13-8 shows a security officer at an airport scrutinizing an image from a baggage screening x-ray system. FuLL BooY SCAN. Transportation Security Administration uses two types of advanced imaging technology today, millimeter wave and backscatter x-ray technology. Millimeter-wave scanners come in two varieties: active and passive. Active scanners predominate the market; passive technology is still under development. Active scan­ners work much like radar, they direct millimeter wave energy at the passenger and then interpret the reflected energy. Since modern scanners can display images that reveal private parts of the human anatomy, some privacy objections were raised by the public when awareness of the technology became public. To alleviate the privacy concerns, in February 201 1 the TSA began testing a new software system on its AIT machines which eliminates passenger-specific images, and instead, "auto­detects" potential threat items and indicates their location on a generic outline of a person. The generic outline is identical for all passengers. If no potential threat items are detected, an "OK" will appear on the monitor with no outline of the body. Backscatter x-ray imaging is also used for full body scanning by detecting radiation reflected from the passenger. X-ray units used for inspecting carry-on lug­gage and people employ low-dosage, low-energy radiation. Higher dosage units are used for checked baggage. Older generation units produced images of low quality and poor contrast. Most of the older analog systems have given way to modern digital video amplification and processing systems that produce clearer images and increased contrast ratios. On its Web site, the TSA assures the public that current technologies are safe and meet national health and safety standards. TSA states that the energy projected by millimeter wave technology is thousands of times less than a cell phone transmission. A single scan using only backscatter technology produces exposure equivalent to 2 minutes of flying on a plane. ExPLOSIVE TRACE DETECTION TECHNOLOGY Explosive trace detection technologies are based on the direct chemical identification of either particles of explosive material or vapor-containing explosive material. Thus, the presence of a threat object or bomb is inferred from the presence of particulate matter or vapor. The main difference between trace detection and electromagnetic imaging is that in trace detection a sample of the explosive material must be trans­ported to the instrument in concentrations that exceed the detection limit. Trace detection technologies cannot be used to detect the presence of metallic weapons. All trace detection equipment is regulated by TSR Part 1544.21 3. The two distinct steps in trace detection are sample collection and chemical identifica­tion. Trace detection practices are more commonly used for baggage screening, as opposed to people screening, in aviation security. Some basics of this technology are discussed next. SAMPLE CoLLECTION. Explosive substances can be detected by instrumentation in their vapor or solid form. Initial efforts in the development of trace detection technology were focused on collecting vapor around the person or baggage. However, because many modern explosives do not readily give off vapor at room temperature, the focus has expanded to include detection of particulates of explosive materials on the skin and other surfaces. If traces of explosive material are to be detected, they must be concentrated from an air sample or dislodged from a substrate. The air sample, called vapor detection, requires large amounts of air to be collected, from which small amounts of the substances of interest are extracted. The substrate sample, called particle detection, requires pieces of explosive material to be removed from the surface to which they are adhering. Both trace detection approaches have strengths and weak­nesses depending on the type of explosive material being sought. Vapor technolo­gies are more effective for detecting explosive materials with high vapor pressures, while particulate technologies are more appropriate for detecting explosive materi­als with low vapor pressure such as military-style plastic explosives. Samples can be taken either by having the subject walk through a portal (the puffer machine approach) or by passing a hand-wand device over the subject or piece of baggage (the swab approach). Either method may be implemented as a contact or noncontact technique. In contact portal sampling, passengers walk through a portal by pushing open a door or by rubbing against paddles or brushes. In a noncontact system, an airstream passes over the passengers as they walk through the portal. Hand-wand devices may be used to sample air around the person or to make physical contact. In general, contact methods focus on gather­ing particulates of explosive material from the hands or clothing of the subject. Noncontact methods may use the airstream to dislodge particles, or they may dis­till a sample of explosive vapor from the airstream. Although using a hand-wand device is a potentially efficient sample collec­tion technique, it is more labor-intensive and more time-consuming than collecting samples by using an automated portal. The optimum solution may be to attach a hand-wand device to a portal-based trace detection system as a higher-level surveil­lance accessory. This is a common technique used with metal detection portals. In trace detection, a single chemical-identification instrument could be served by both the portal and the hand-wand device sample collection mechanisms. Transportation Security Administration is expanding its use of explosive trace detection, especially using the swab approach. To ensure the health of TSA work­ers, swabs are disposed of after each use. When tested, the swab is placed inside a fixed or portable machine which analyzes the content for potential explosive resi­due. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act funding is also being used to pur­chase additional explosive trace detection equipment. Figure 1 3-9 shows a security officer at an airport checking for traces of explosives found on a passenger. ExPLOSIVE DETECTION SYsTEMS (EDSs) Bulk explosive detection systems (EDSs) include any device or system that remotely senses a physical or chemical property (or combination thereof) of an object in an attempt to detect the presence of an explosive concealed in a container (e.g., passenger baggage). Today TSA screens 100% of all baggage placed on an airplane, often covering 2 million passengers processed each day. This equipment must function without causing unreasonable delays, so reliability and throughput are very important. There have been major improvements in EDS baggage screening technol­ogy in recent years. TSA has recognized this trend and has fostered technology improvement through priority funding provided by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. In fact, a new standard has evolved in this area of Checked Baggage Inspection Systems (CBIS). At present, average in-line, medium speed equipment can inspect around 600 bags per hour. TSA standard for high-volume screening is a throughput of at least 900 bags per hour with a low, false alarm rate. Companies are meeting this challenge by providing improved image quality and on-screen resolution using three-dimensional (3D) images very similar to the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology used in medical radiology offices today. In-line checked baggage systems of the future will be extremely efficient, able to achieve a throughput of over 1,000 bags per hour, and easier to maintain with built-in diagnostics tools. These high-speed screening systems will also be upgradable and allow airports to increase baggage handling capability without major capital investments. METAL DETECTORS Screening procedures currently used in U.S. airports, at least during routine opera­tions, involve metal detection portals for screening passengers and x-ray imaging systems for screening hand-carried baggage. Metal detection devices impose a time-varying magnetic field in the space within the portal that induces eddy currents in metallic or ferromagnetic objects passing through that space. Various methods are used to detect these eddy currents, and when they exceed a preset level, an audible or visual alarm goes off, and an operator intervenes to ascertain the presence or absence of a dangerous object or weapon. The effectiveness of this security screen­ing system depends not only on the performance of the equipment, but also on the performance of the personnel operating the equipment and resolving the alarms. Metal detectors vary from portals to handheld systems depending on the application and size of the airport. Most passengers are required to pass through a portal-type metal detector, but a more scrutinized search could be conducted with a handheld or portable metal detector. Metal detectors are not as effective as other systems, and their deficiency lies in their inability to catch all forms of dangerous weapons. Their greatest weakness is that they do not detect metals incapable of being magnetized. Newer-generation metal detectors can search for ferrous or non­ferrous objects. Metal detectors are used broadly around all the airports and are one of the most important sources of security. An important advance in metal detectors is the multizone concept. Through a multizone approach for portal-type metal detectors, sensitivity can be assigned to specific areas of the body zones that the metal detector would scan. Each zone has its own sensitivity adjustment. This permits the detection response of each zone to be independently adjusted. The horizontal zone corresponding to the foot region of the body can be made more or less sensitive than the waist region or vice versa. Use of metal detectors in airport security is regulated by TSA under its Part 1 544.209. Figure 13-10 shows a sample of some of the loaded firearms that have been detected and confiscated during airport security screening. BIOMETRICS AND FuTURE CHECKPOINT SYSTEMS The term biometrics refers to the emerging field of technology devoted to identifying individuals by using biological traits such as those based on retinal or iris scanning, fingerprints, or face recognition. Biometric technology is defined as the automated use of physiological or behavioral characteristics to determine or verify identity. This technology has been used in place of passwords by some government agencies but increasingly finds uses in a wide range of security applications, such as preventing unauthorized employees from gaining access to certain areas and assets. Another use is to quickly identify low-risk users, such as prescreened airport passengers, so that security personnel can focus on the much smaller category of "high-risk" passengers. Biometric systems are basically of two types: verification and recognition. By measuring a physical feature or repeatable action of the individual, we establish a biometric identification. Verification systems require that the individual seeking access have some sort of identification, such as a smart e-card, that is then matched with some physical characteristic of that person to make the verification. A reference measurement of the biometric is obtained when the individual is programmed into the device. In addition to using biometric contractors, TSA has chosen to focus on the 9-11 Commission recommendation that the government take over the No Fly Watch List system. This is the careful computer screening of passenger information by com­paring names to the federal government intelligence watch lists. The Intelligence Reform and Terrorist Prevention Act of 2004 (IRTPA) codified this recommenda­tion so that as of November 1 , 2010, the new TSA Secure Flight Program requires airlines to collect and transmit the following Secure Flight passenger data to TSA: • Name as it appears on government issued ID when traveling • Date of birth • Gender • Redress number (this is a special number given to passengers who have resolved denied boarding problems with the TSA to prevent future delays as a misidentified passenger) Many U.S. airports are now approved for Global Entry and TSA pre-check screening. Global Entry is a program of the U.S. Customs and Border Protection service that allows pre-approved, low-risk travelers to receive expedited clearance upon arrival into the United States. Passengers can enroll in these plans online and must also visit a government office for a background check and fingerprinting. In this expedited personal screening process, passengers do not have to remove shoes, laptop computers, small personal liquid containers, belts, or light jackets. Passengers who register for these programs are usually rewarded with a quick clearance through TSA security checkpoints. STRENGTHENING AIRCRAFT AND BAGGAGE CONTAINERS Another approach to aviation security is to try to strengthen aircraft frames and to plan redundancies in vital systems such as controls, electrical systems, and hydrau­lics to mitigate the effects of bomb blasts in flight. A further alternative is to use hardened baggage containers that can control the effects of bomb blasts in checked baggage. Retrofitting is difficult. It is easier and more practical to incorporate such design measures during the design stage of the aircraft. The federal aviation administration has engaged in extensive studies with military experts and airframe manufacturers to learn how aircraft fail due to explosions in flight and to discover measures to increase chances of aircraft survival. Explosive tests have been carried out by the federal aviation administration in the United States and in the United Kingdom to check calculations. Using hardened unit load devices (HULDs) to protect aircraft from explosive attacks is not a new concept. Airlines that operate in high-risk areas of the world have been using custom-built containers. Because these containers are much too heavy for general use, only one or two are used per aircraft for carrying select items. However, new advances in technology and the need for increased security after the terrorist attacks of 2001 have resulted in greater use of these contain­ers. Even though a certified HULD is now available, the federal aviation administration has not developed a deployment plan for airline service. The idea of replacing all existing containers with HULDs has been abandoned because of its impracticality in terms of weight, cost, and operational factors. CocKPIT DooR REINFORCEMENT On January 10, 2002, the federal aviation administration published new standards to protect cockpits from intrusion, small-arms fire, and fragmentation devices, such as grenades. The rule required U.S. airline operators to install reinforced doors by April 9, 2003. Congress appropriated $97 million to help the airlines defray the cost of cockpit door replacement. Current cockpit door regulations and security standards are found in 14 code of federal regulations Section 25.79 5. This single enhancement has proven to be a very successful measure to counter cockpit invasions. CYBERSECURITY Cyberspace is the environment in which communication occurs between and over computer networks. Such networks are vulnerable to both physical and remote cyberattacks, and the protection against such acts constitutes cybersecurity. It can be particularly challenging to defend against such attacks since terrorists can oper­ate from anywhere in the world and can use inherent weaknesses in the numerous complex linkages between cyberspace and physical systems. Given that software and information technology are critical components of modern commercial aviation, to include the airport and air traffic systems, a new battlefront has been opened by terrorists in these areas. According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office report in 2015, cyberattacks have grown tenfold recently. In 2006 there were only 5,503 such incidents reported, compared to 60,753 in 2013. With the development of NextGen technologies underway, as described in Chapter 10, experts say there are multiple cybersecurity vulnerabilities in the new system. Whenever technology is increasingly automated, it needs to be integrated with the same degree of security. However, NextGen technologies still have significant security-control weaknesses that will be a threat to ensuring safe and uninterrupted operations. Replacing a radar-based air traffic control system with one that connects controllers and aircraft via data and satellite links will create an environment that is much more sensitive to a cyberattack. One NextGen technol­ogy endangered by this is ADS-B, which allows aircraft to determine its position and broadcast that information to other aircraft and ground controllers through satellite. The security issue here is that ADS-B is publicly accessible using real-time computer applications that have flight tracking. It could be easy for a hacker to create a fictitious aircraft in the system, which could confuse pilots and air traffic controllers. NextGen technology is not the only weak link in the aviation sector. Boeing 787 and Airbus 380 electronic-enabled aircraft, also known as e-Enabled, will also raise security concerns. The systems in these planes are networked in real-time to ground stations and receive and transmit data that can influence navigation, main­tenance performance, and airplane health back to stakeholders. This gives airplane power-plant manufacturers direct access to the engines while in flight for health monitoring and diagnoses. Everything is interconnected, from the transportation system to plane diagnostic entities. Unfortunately, manufacturers often do not per­form sufficient cybersecurity testing prior to issuing an airworthiness certificate, which is the document that authorizes a plane to fly. That shortfall is problematic because planes are becoming less manually controlled and more technology based. However, there does not seem to be a regulatory remedy in the future due to the complexity of the issue and the required financial resources. Although the FAA, European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), and Transport Canada rely on the radio technical commission for aeronautics certification, D0-178C for guidance on aviation soft­ware, the document does not specifically address airborne network and data security. This shortfall has the potential to create nonstandardized and potentially unfair agreements between various users and the regulatory agencies for an accept­able process for the compliance of safe, secure, and efficient network design and operations. Thus, in an effort to strengthen our fight against cyberattacks, we must focus on two measures. First, the industry must adapt its technology. Companies must take into account the whole threat life cycle, which includes building the best pro­tection and recognizing threats as the environment changes. For example, Boeing took proactive measures against threats by requesting the federal aviation administration to issue special conditions for its Model 777-200, -300, and -300ER after detecting vulnerabilities in the avionics systems. Another example is the use of threat modeling, a technique that assists software engineers in identifying and documenting potential secu­rity threats. Threat modeling provides development teams with a way of finding strengths and weaknesses in software applications through visual representations of the system. The second measure to counter cyberattacks is through increasing cybersecu­rity awareness. Businesses must be willing to share information with each other, as hackers may target the same types of companies and infrastructure. Additionally, society must grow the pool of cybersecurity professionals. According to a 2015 analysis by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, there are more than 200,000 cybersecu­rity jobs unfilled, the demand is expected to increase to a 1.5 million shortage of these professionals by 2020. Security for commercial aviation now means not only protecting people and property but also safeguarding information and data against unauthorized persons and systems. As we move into the future of flight, we must consider a new set of questions to ensure safety and security objectives are being met. We will begin to see discourse shift to discuss the following topics: • Who can access the system? • How can the system be accessed? • What can be attacked? • What needs to be protected? aviation safety report system EXAMPLES There are several measures put in place by airlines to protect the security of pas­sengers. Below are a few examples from the Aviation Safety Reporting System that demonstrate aviation professionals' tenacity in maintaining security through their adherence to company policies. The first report is from a pilot who is reporting a problem with boarding. The second report is from a cabin crewmember reporting on a passenger screening breach. SECURITY PROCEDURES Title: Compromised security resulting from procedural deviations. During the initial boarding process, I heard my Flight Attendant trying to keep passengers of f of the airplane until a bag was removed from outside the aircraft (we had coordinated with the gate agents ahead of time to have the passengers sent out 25 minutes prior to departure per standard policy). However, during the boarding process, we noticed a checked bag sitting forward of the wing on the green gate-checked bag cart now with the other passengers' bags. The passengers were dropping their green gate-checked bags off alongside this white checked bag (all on the same cart). After hearing my Flight Attendant, I immedi­ately left the flight deck and stopped the passengers from boarding the plane. I had the passengers already on the plane deplaned and sent back inside. I advised Operations we had a white checked bag in the same proximity as passengers and that we needed to perform a full security search of the aircraft (which my crew performed and documented). I contacted Dispatch who contacted Ops. Ops sent out a GSC [Ground Security Coordinator] to ask why we were delaying the flight. After all of the coordination and security search, we were allowed to con­tinue the flight. A checked bag should never be placed around passengers. We were repeat­edly told over and over again by the rampers (and the GSC) that placing white checked bags in front of the wing is commonplace when a baggage cart is not around. We were then chastised for delaying the flight and were told that "This is how we do things over at the X and Y terminals. We always put white tags on bags at the gate." I had a VERY dif ficult time convincing the GSC that this bag did NOT come from a passenger at the gate (it was a checked bag, not a gate-checked bag that was white-tagged). My Flight Attendant tried to explain our Company security policies to the GSC, but the GSC was again saying this is how they did things at "X and Y." We had a very difficult time com­municating with the ground personnel who were convinced they were doing everything right. The station rampers NEED to know security procedures so that the flight crew can be on the same page as the rampers. The focus is on on-time perfor­mance way too much, this time at the risk of security. After coordinating with Dispatch and Ops, we were told that the bag was from a connecting flight and not placed on the concrete so that it didn't get wet. Unfortunately, we had numerous bags that were in f act placed on the concrete behind the wing, so that was a poor excuse. What is more, I took a picture of the very dry concrete immediately after being told this. If a baggage cart needs to be present so this does not take place in the future, then get a baggage cart. If security procedures need to be taught to ground personnel, then teach security. If on-time perfor­mance needs to be secondary to security (as it should be), then teach safety first. What is more, after we completed our turn, I was contacted by Dispatch saying that we as the flight crew were now being blamed for the delayed flight. We were told that the ground personnel were now saying that the checked bag was removed from the cart before ANY passengers were boarded which is a bold lie. When I left the flight deck (with a few passengers already onboard), I went immediately to the white checked bag on the baggage cart and inquired about what it was and where it continuing airworthines management exposition from. So if honesty needs to be taught, then teach honesty. Questions for the reader: Please explain why the flight crew was so concerned about passengers possibly being able to access a checked bag. How did employee ethics impact this scenario and future scenarios? CABIN CREW Title: Security breach from early boarding of plane. Narrative 1 : Yesterday a t XA:58 was going thru security when a passenger behind m e stated, "why were we late since they are boarding," in which I replied impossible he must have mistaken us for the cancelled flight from the previous night and they sent the passengers to an unscheduled flight for XA:30 departure. I stated that he must have been slightly delayed since our flight has a XC:OO departure with an XB:OO sign in. When my crew and I arrived at the gate we noticed few people in gate area and many boarding our flight! We were in disbelief since it was not even XB:OO and boarding time was not till XB:15! When we approached the [gate] agents they were in shock and did not know how to respond to us. We told them that this was a huge security breach and refused to board until they deplaned all passengers and do another security sweep. They did as requested and we boarded, did our equipment check and were able to board and depart on time. Narrative 2: We arrived at the gate approximately XA:57 and [are] met by the Ground Manager informing us they allowed passengers to board without the entire flight crew (pilots and flight attendants). I was shocked and told her that was a serious breach of security. Our Lead Flight Attendant and the rest of the crew refused to step on board the plane till proper security procedure be corrected. We were looking for the Captain, not aware he boarded the plane. After a few minutes the Captain deplaned and continuing airworthines management exposition back to the gate where he basically wanted us to go ahead and continue the rest of the boarding process. He said majority of the passengers are already on board and he wanted us to continue. I told him I did not want to violate security procedure with another violation because he said so. We tried to explain to him we also need few minutes to check our emer­gency equipment and other security procedure. Moreover we are not sure those passengers that boarded had been security cleared. Our Lead FA and the other 2 FAs explained to Captain as well to please do it right. We told him we need to deplane everybody and do another security sweep. If we do it right immediately we can manage to board all and still leave on time. At the end it was corrected and security sweep was accomplished after deplaning all the passengers. I hon­estly have no idea why it happened. This was my first experience of a security violation in my many years of flying. Gate agents and ground crew need to be retrained on security procedures. Most importantly Captain must be on top of these and have it corrected as soon as possible instead of persuading flight atten­dants to continue a serious security violation that can easily be corrected in the first place. Narrative 3: When crew arrived airport personnel had already begun boarding flight when there were no crew members onboard the airplane. As a matter of f act, they began boarding before we were even on airport property. Question for the reader: Please discuss why do you think all three flight atten­dants submitted reports for this incident instead of just relying on one flight atten­dant to report the situation on behalf of all of the cabin crew. CONCLUSION Figure 13-11 shows the large area consumed by the passenger screening area for one of the terminals at Barcelona International Airport in Spain. The enormous costs incurred to implement modern security technology illustrates the acute nature of the threat facing commercial aviation operations. High-technology detection methods can yield results, but it is clear that these results are expensive and are not perfect. Often, a small increase in security is achieved at very great expense. Furthermore, the cost is not just one of capital asset acquisition. There is also the matter of operations and maintenance. Although technology has its place in the overall security scheme, it is no panacea for air transportation security concerns. On the personnel side, greater attention needs to be paid to security staff recruitment, training, and procedures. Security professionals play a critical role and are the ones who interpret the results of the technological analyses. The technology itself needs to be designed from the start with cybersecurity in mind, and upgrades need to be continuously performed to guard against the latest types of cyberattacks. Until the TSA was established and took over security screening, many security personnel were low-paid workers who lacked the required training. The profes­sion was plagued by questions of morale, turnover, stress, and ineffectiveness. The federal aviation administration insiders had criticized security personnel as being inadequate. The airline transport association responded by developing standards that called for better selection, improved work conditions, and rewards for effective security personnel. In addition, many airlines upgraded their personnel screening processes. Nevertheless, despite new training requirements, the process remained uneven. The length of training was too short, and the required contents to be covered were loosely defined. When the TSA took over this function in 2001 , conditions improved for security personnel in terms of pay, training, and other benefits. This has led to improved levels of security at airports. Another consistent problem through the years has been the screening of air­port workers. Airports are like cities in that they require employees to work a large variety of vocations ranging from salespeople to mechanics to cleaners. Because this diversity of workers provides terrorists with numerous opportunities for infil­trating airport security zones, the federal aviation administration requires background checks, the review of previous employment records, and the wearing of special identification badges. Despite these efforts, these measures do not guarantee security. Terrorists can forge badges, although forging computerized badges is a far more difficult task, requiring insider collaboration or access to the computerized database and badge process. With the landscape of aviation technology changing, terrorists now have a new opportunity to exploit weaknesses and loopholes in the system. Instead of targeting airports and property, they can interfere with software and communication from remote locations. In addition, a technology solution alone suffers from problems defined by two related axioms. The first is that airport security is very site-specific. The thought being that what works well and inexpensively in one place is not necessarily a sound approach in some other place. The second axiom is political: regulators sel­dom recognize the real-world needs of security. No matter how well conceived a security regulation may be, it is not likely to have anticipated the kinds of problems that may actually arise. An important concluding point is that, in spite of all that have been accom­plished to ensure the security of the traveling public, the terrorist, in one sense, always has the upper hand. While we must protect every element of the transporta­tion system at all times (not just aviation), the terrorist always has the advantage of being the only one who knows the time, the place, and the method of the next attack. Stay vigilant! KEY TERMS Anti-hijacking or Air Transportation Security Act of 1974 Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 Aviation Security Improvement Act of 1990 Bag Matching Biometrics Checked Baggage Inspection Systems (CBIS) Cybersecurity Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Explosive Detection Systems (EDSs) Explosive Trace Detection Technology Hardened Unit Load Device (HULD) international civil aviation organization Security Manual (Doc 8973) Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (IRTPA) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Annex 1 7 Metal Detectors Millimeter-Wave Scanners National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) Security Management System (SeMS) Security versus Safety The 9-11 Commission The Air Marshal Program The Homeland Security Act Transportation Security Administration (TSA) White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security (the Gore Commission) X-ray Imaging REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. What is the difference between security and safety? 2. Provide three examples of different categories of attacks on civil aviation. 3. Describe the international response to terrorism by international civil aviation organization and the world community. 4. What is the Air Marshal Program and why was it instituted? 5. Discuss the hijacking era. When did it end? 6. What was the biggest security lesson learned from the Pan Am Flight 1 03 tragedy? 7. Use an example to explain the concept of redundant technical measures in security. 8. Discuss the role and functions of the Transportation Security Administration (TSA). 9. What was the reason for the 9-11 Commission? What impact did its recom­mendations have on the U.S. intelligence community? 10. Explain the operation of the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC). 11. Discuss some of the problems encountered in the gathering and analysis of intelligence for security purposes. 12. Give an example of four different security devices used to prevent weapons and explosives from entering an aircraft and explain the workings of these devices.