Title: Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study – An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Process – Chapter 5 Author(s): Report federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, federal aviation administration Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The Report of the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process. March 2002 US Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration March 14, 2002, Federal Aviation Administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification 800 Independence Avenue, S.W.Washington, DC Safety Oversight Processes federal aviation administration and Industry oversight of the design, manufacture, and operation of commercial aircraft involves a large number of tasks. These oversight tasks are often the basis for the discovery of information used to establish safe practices and processes. Oversight also serves as a means to assess the adequacy of existing standards and requirements. The FAA’s Aircraft Certification Service provides oversight of the continued airworthiness of in-service aircraft. These oversight responsibilities include engine and aircraft certification, the development and management of the Designated Engineering Representative (DER) system, rule-making, the validation of foreign engine and aircraft certifications, and, when necessary, the development and issuance of airworthiness directives. FAA’s Flight Standards Service oversight responsibilities include the certification of airlines, airmen, mechanics, and repair stations. They also provide continuing oversight of airline operations, training, and maintenance activities. Industry oversight includes programs used by manufacturers, airlines, and repair stations to review and assess existing processes. Regulatory requirements drive some of the industry oversight processes. However, there are examples of organizations in the industry that have quality assurance programs that exceed those required by the regulations. Strong and effective industry and federal aviation administration oversight processes can be used to identify potential safety problems and accident precursors. The present exceptional commercial aviation safety record can be further enhanced by making improvements in these areas. The designated engineering representative system, detection of single-point human failures, and the industry’s internal oversight processes are the subject of findings or observations in this chapter. Preparation of these findings was based on reviews of relevant requirements and advisory material, case studies, historical reports, presentations by and discussions with operators, the contributions of personnel from large and small maintenance, repair, and alteration companies, federal aviation administration Principal Maintenance and Operations Inspectors, and CPS team members. Finding 14 Consultant Designated Engineering Representatives (DERs) have approved designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. People and Process for Oversight of DERs The designated engineering representative system generally works well. This system has been enhanced by the addition of new processes for the selection and annual review of DERs. However, some consultant designated engineering representative project approvals, which do not require federal aviation administration review, combined with the lack of designated engineering representative and federal aviation administration technical expertise in certain specialized fields, have resulted in designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. Contributing to this is the reluctance of some federal aviation administration designated engineering representative advisors to recommend disciplinary action when DERs are found to be working below acceptable standards. The release of the FAA’s Designee Management Handbook, Order 8100.8A in January 2001, provides guidance for the appointment, annual review, and renewal of DERs [1]. The new guidance is a considerable improvement over past practices. It provides a standard structure for appointing and overseeing designated engineering representative activity, including detailed instructions for the termination of DERs. Two categories of DERs exist: company DERs working for airline, manufacturing, and design organizations and consultant DERs working independently. While problems do occur with company DERs, they are usually discovered because of the larger engineering pool in place and by subsequent peer review. Additionally, the field service experience is reviewed by these DERs, so they are familiar with problems associated with the design. Consultants and company DERs who work for smaller manufacturers that do not have large engineering staffs do not have these peer review or field experience processes. Some consultant DERs have approved designs and data for modifications and alterations that are non-compliant with the regulations. For example, a DER-approved passenger-to-freighter conversion was found to be non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations after the aircraft had returned to service [2]. In this instance, the independent designated engineering representative consulted with an federal aviation administration advisor about the STC. However, based on presentations and interviews with experienced federal aviation administration engineers involved in the investigation of this conversion, neither the designated engineering representative nor the advisor had the technical knowledge to make a proper compliance finding. DERs who have been granted approval authority need not submit their designs to an ACO for review. In the case of the Swissair MD-11 accident, it was a preliminary finding of an federal aviation administration Special Certification Review (SCR) team [3] that an independent designated engineering representative approved a passenger entertainment system that violated the design criteria used by the manufacturer [4]. In this case, the IFE power source was from a bus other than the one that the flight crew would expect, thereby possibly contributing to confusion when trying to isolate a smoke or fumes source using the emergency checklist. It should be noted that the TSB is leading the investigation for this accident and has not completed its work or established a probable cause. In the case of a Boeing 737-900 after-market antenna installation, errors were discovered in the analysis assumptions when a review was conducted by aircraft certification engineers [5]. These errors resulted in a DER-approved design that did not meet damage tolerance requirements. The perception of some designated engineering representative advisors is that disciplining DERs is difficult because of fear of litigation. This misperception has resulted in little if any, disciplinary action being taken when it may be warranted. A senior federal aviation administration attorney interviewed by the CPS team stated that disciplinary action could readily be taken when appropriate. federal aviation administration designated engineering representative advisor competence is affected by a number of factors. These include experience, education, workload, and the requirement to supervise and review work outside their areas of expertise. In some cases, this may require experience in and detailed knowledge of a subject to do an adequate review, which the designated engineering representative advisor may not possess. In the case of the passenger-to-freighter conversion cited, the designated engineering representative advisor did not properly assess the adequacy of the design data when consulted by the DER. As a result, the federal aviation administration was not aware that an unsafe condition existed [6]. The commercial aerospace industry could not function effectively or efficiently without DERs. Critical to this system is the assurance, through the FAA’s oversight process, that DER-approved designs will maintain airworthiness compliance. The experience levels of federal aviation administration Aviation Safety Engineers (ASEs) are an important factor in determining the effectiveness of this oversight function. The adequacy of federal aviation administration technical competency has been the subject of two previous studies: the National Research Council (NRC) study of 1980 [7] and, more recently, a General Accounting Office (GAO) report in 1993 [8]. A central theme in the NRC study was concern for the technical capabilities of the federal aviation administration specialists overseeing the safety of the commercial fleet. Several recommendations concerned this central issue and concluded that the federal aviation administration “. . . must improve the expertise and quality of the technical staff. . . .”The 1993 GAO report commented on the high turnover rate and low experience level of federal aviation administration ASEs in the two federal aviation administration ACOs responsible for the majority of commercial transport airplane oversight (Long Beach and Seattle). The turnover rate in ASEs between 1982 and 1993 was 107%, and in 1993, more than 50% had less than five years of federal aviation administration experience. To update this information, the turnover rates and experience levels for the Seattle ACO and the New England Engine Certification Office were surveyed during the CPS review. Data gathered for the period from 1993 through 2001 showed that the combined turnover rate remains high at 115%, and, presently, over 50% of the ASEs still have less than five years of federal aviation administration experience. Turnover rates and experience levels are not the only indicators of an organization’s technical competence. However, this particular engineering subject area requires years of interdisciplinary exposure to understand the increasingly complex interrelated systems and human factors interfaces of modern aircraft and to learn from past mistakes that led to accidents. The consistently high turnover rate and associated low experience levels are indicators of the limited time available for ASEs to acquire the necessary experience and to understand and apply accident precursor information. Enhancing the expertise of the federal aviation administration ASEs acting as designated engineering representative advisors and establishing criteria for accomplishing adequate review of designated engineering representative approvals has the potential to make significant improvements in the FAA’s oversight of all aspects of commercial transport aircraft design, operations, and maintenance. Finding 15 Processes to detect and correct errors made by individuals in the design, certification, installation, repair, alteration, and operation of transport airplanes are inconsistent, allowing unacceptable errors in critical airworthiness areas. Detection of Single Point Human Error For some certification activities, there are well-ordered and effective processes; for others, no formal process exists, and existing processes may be ineffective. When effective processes do not exist, individuals working independently have made errors in critical airworthiness areas; some of these errors have resulted in accidents. The federal aviation administration has based safety requirements for transport airplanes on fail-safe, redundant, and damage-tolerant design concepts. An important aspect of the fail-safe concept is to eliminate, as far as possible, the dependence on any single system or structural element, the failure of which would cause a hazardous or catastrophic condition (14 code of federal regulations §25.1309 and 14 code of federal regulations §25.571 and Section 5 of Advisory Circular 25.1309-1A.). The fail-safe concept is well established and is intended to protect the airplane from single failure; it extends to provide protection from human errors in some areas of airplane design and operation. For example, one reason transport airplanes require two pilots is to allow continued safe operation if one pilot is incapacitated. Criteria for the development of the software used in the most critical aircraft systems (RTCA/DO-178B) recommend that software verification be accomplished by someone other than the software designer. 14 code of federal regulations §121.369(b)(2)) requires an independent review or verification of maintenance and alterations by a second qualified person to ensure the work has been correctly accomplished in areas where a “. . . failure, malfunction, or defect [that could] endanger the safe operation of the aircraft,” (hereafter referred to as critical airworthiness areas in this finding). However, the requirement that these critical airworthiness areas are fail-safe from a human error perspective is not well defined; it is generally not required in the design area and may not be consistently applied in the maintenance and alteration areas. In commercial aircraft and engine design, where adequate engineering staff exists, redundancy in the oversight of the design generally happens as a result of company policy or organization. However, this redundancy is not required and is not always found when design changes, maintenance, repairs, or alterations involving critical airworthiness areas are accomplished. An example of a situation where a lack of redundancy adversely affected safety was the Japan Airlines Boeing 747 accident involving improper repair of the aft pressure bulkhead [9]. The engineering drawings for the repair were properly done, and the parts were properly manufactured. When difficulty was experienced in installing a part, that part was altered in a manner that did not maintain the integrity of the design. There was no requirement to inspect the work as it was being accomplished or after the repair was complete. A post-work inspection could not have detected that a part was altered. The result was a repair that did not maintain the airworthiness of the aircraft, and an accident resulted. Two Boeing 747 aircraft accidents were caused when engines were mounted to their pylons without fuse-pin retaining devices [10,11,12]. The pins worked loose during flight, causing separation of the engine from the airplane in such a manner as to cause an accident. The British Civil Aviation Authority method of delegating design approval under Joint Aviation Authority Regulation (JAR) 21 has the effect of reducing the chances of single-point human error by delegating authority to organizations instead of to individuals. The expected result is that having a group responsible for design and certification will be more likely to provide adequate redundancy, reducing the instances of failures as a result of single-point human errors. Establishing such redundant verification requirements or practices for all work in critical airworthiness areas would improve the overall safety of commercial air carrier operations. It is very important that such requirements specify that inspections or verifications be accomplished at a time and in a manner when errors can still be detected and corrected. If critical inspection sequences are not specified, improper maintenance work may not be detected. 14 code of federal regulations §43.13(b) requires all work be performed to ensure an airplane is returned, after repair, maintenance, or modification, to its original or properly altered configuration. The rule does not specify how this quality of work is to be met or assured. 14 code of federal regulations §121.371(c) specifies no person may perform a required inspection if they performed the item of work required to be inspected. Yet, although post-work verification inspection requirements are addressed in a general manner, no specific guidance or definition of the type of work requiring inspection is available. The only requirement is that each airline provide, upon request, a list of the items that have been designated as needing such inspection. The original equipment manufacturer does not participate in developing this list. For DER-approved type design data, the same individual who designed the change can approve the change. These DER-approved data are submitted to the ACO, but there is no requirement that they be reviewed by ACO engineers. designated engineering representative approval of data used for field approvals (FAA Form 337, Major Alteration, and Major Repairs) or major repairs are not required to be submitted to the ACO for review. In this case, the designated engineering representative creating the design data can also approve the design data. The federal aviation administration and industry have long accepted that single-point failures in the design of transport airplanes should be avoided in critical airworthiness areas. The human element (DERs, engineers, maintenance personnel, etc.) also affects critical airworthiness areas. By applying the same single-point failure philosophy to human error as is applied to aircraft design, the occurrence of accidents caused by the mistakes of a single individual can be reduced. There are linkages between this finding and Findings 3, 4, and 14. Observation 2 Some air carriers do more extensive oversight than others of their in-house and outsourced flight operations and maintenance activities, with major safety and economic benefits. Oversight Processes and Resources: Industry Briefings provided by large 14 code of federal regulations Part 121 certificated air carrier personnel indicated that when voluntary quality assurance and technical analysis processes are used, significant safety and economic benefits could be realized [13,14]. The effectiveness of these processes was substantiated in interviews with federal aviation administration principal inspectors with maintenance and operations oversight responsibilities [15]. 14 code of federal regulations §121.373, Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS) mandates one of these quality assurance processes. This regulation requires each certificate holder to establish and maintain a program to monitor the performance and effectiveness of its inspection and maintenance activities and to correct any deficiencies in those activities. The CASS process encompasses organizational, procedural, performance, and record-keeping requirements for the maintenance and alteration of air carrier aircraft. Airlines that are the most rigorous in developing and vigorous in applying quality assurance programs get results and, therefore, are the most effective. The Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA) and the Aviation Safety Analysis Program (ASAP) are examples of air carrier voluntary quality assurance processes that were briefed to the CPS team. Again, operators with these programs and federal aviation administration officials responsible for their oversight reported enhanced safety based on the use of information obtained from these programs. The federal aviation administration should encourage all segments of the air carrier industry to enhance their internal analysis processes. It has been suggested that federal aviation administration incentives could be considered to influence others in the aviation community to enhance internal and external quality assurance and technical analysis activities. Conclusions The Certification Process Study evaluated processes associated with the certification, operations, and maintenance of commercial transport airplanes. Particular attention was given to the processes associated with the interfaces between the certification, operations, and maintenance functions, as depicted by the arrows in Figure 6. The study identified fifteen findings and two observations in the following categories: • Safety Assurance Processes•Aviation Safety Data Management • Maintenance/Operations/Certification Interfaces •Major Repairs and Modifications• Safety Oversight Processes The team identified four areas of commonality in the findings and observations (this list is not all-inclusive): Information Flow Critical information may not be available to those who could act upon it. Organizational barriers to communication, failure to recognize the need to communicate, information overload, and language differences may all contribute to information flow breakdowns. Human Factors Failure to account for the human element is a common thread in accidents. Faulty assumptions, incomplete understanding of tasks, and poor feedback of actual human responses may all contribute to mistakes or failures in the human/machine interface. Lessons Learned Significant safety issues learned through accidents are sometimes lost with time and must be re-learned at a very high price. The absence of a comprehensive lessons-learned database, general or non-existent requirements, constraints on information sharing, and loss of corporate knowledge may all contribute to problems being repeated. Accident Precursors Awareness that certain service incidents are effective indicators of the need for intervention measures requires airplane-level safety awareness acquired through both training and experience. Risk management tools and understanding of lessons learned are vital in developing the skills necessary to consistently recognize accident precursor events and initiate corrective actions. Figure 7 indicates how various other perspectives may be useful in identifying the commonalities among the findings and observations. It must be stressed that the findings and observations in this study are clearly interrelated and should not be addressed in isolation. Safety Awareness at the Airplane Level Many of the accidents reviewed during this study followed one or more previous incidents that were not acted upon because those involved in industry and government were unaware of the significance of what they had observed. Often, the reason for this lack of awareness was a failure to view the significance of the event at the airplane level rather than at the system or subsystem level. This airplane-level perspective allows the interface areas to be most apparent, such as human factors considerations of a maintenance task and specific flight crew procedures necessary for system failure intervention. This is also the attribute of a safety specialist that is most difficult to attain, as it depends to a very large extent on the experience of the individual combined with technical capability. Safety awareness at the airplane level is needed for all key safety specialists regardless of their organization and is achieved by both proper training and adequate experience, as illustrated in Figure 8. Safety initiatives could be better coordinated and more effective if the operator, manufacturer, and federal aviation administration could achieve and maintain this level of safety awareness. Cultural Change Traditional relationships among the regulators and industry have inherent constraints that have, in some cases, limited the ability to effectively identify and act on accident precursors. Further safety improvements will require significant intra- and inter-organizational cultural changes to facilitate a more open exchange of information. Regulatory solutions alone cannot achieve the desired results. Solutions are Interrelated Among Manufacturers, Operators, and FAA. Improvements to the safety processes identified in this study will require the manufacturer, operator, and federal aviation administration to work together with coordinated initiatives (see Figure 9). It will be necessary for each organization to enlist the support of a workforce with the necessary safety knowledge and experience, including expanding knowledge in the major interface areas such as those identified in this study. From the information gathered during this study, it is clear that process improvements could be applied in certain key areas, particularly those interfaces with safety implications. Process improvements alone will not improve safety unless regulators and industry work together towards this goal. It will require personnel with special skills, knowledge, and experience to recognize lessons learned and accident precursors and to properly apply risk management tools and techniques.