Title: Commercial Aviation Safety– Chapter 8 Author(s): Stephen K. Cusick; Antonio I. Cortes; Clarence C. Rodrigues Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, Accidents AIRCRAFT SAFETY SYSTEMS LEARNING OBJECTIVES After completing this chapter, you should be able to • Recognize the importance of jet engine development and advances in solving problems of fuel consumption, noise, reliability, durability, stability, and thrust. • Describe several breakthroughs in technology associated with the advent of the jet era. • Explain how improvements in high-lift systems have resulted in safer aircraft. • List and briefly describe advances that have taken place in five stopping systems. • Discuss the importance of stability and control characteristics in relation to safety and give several examples of developments in powered controls and improvements in low-speed stall characteristics. • Understand how criteria and procedures used in aircraft design over the years have produced long-life, damage-tolerant structures with excellent safety records. • Explain the concept of fail-safe design. • List and discuss the parameters that define aircraft aging. • Describe several approaches and new technologies designed to address the problems of wind shear, volcanic ash, ice, and precipitation. • Summarize some flight deck technology changes that have made significant contributions to improving safety. • Explain how computational fluid dynamics ( computational fluid dynamics ) has enhanced the study of wing design and engine/airframe integration. • Discuss the importance of the following technologies to aircraft development and safety: wind tunnel, flight simulator, structural tests, flight tests, flight data recorder, and cockpit voice recorder. INTRODUCTION The purpose of this chapter is to relate how the wealth of technology and the improvement of design tools have contributed to the excellent safety record of today's jet transport fleet. In addition, a discussion of new technologies that should further improve the safety and efficiency of tomorrow's airplanes Is included. Rapid advances in technology have led to the development of extremely complex and highly sophisticated commercial aircraft. A major portion of human tasks that were demanding and performed manually are now automated. Modern autopilot and auto-throttle systems are highly reliable, often more precise than human pilots, and deliver predictable performance in most cases. Modern pilots are increasingly described as system operators who control aircraft mostly through complex interfaces comprised of knobs, dials, and typing on computers and who supervise the work of automated systems, versus directly controlling aircraft through manual inputs on controls. Furthermore, new fly-by-wire aircraft sever the mechanical connection between the pilot and aircraft wing and tail flight controls. Fly-by-wire refers to the electronic linkage from the sidestick ( or control yoke ) to computers to activate flight controls. This type of system can come in a number of forms. Some aircraft, such as the Airbus A-320 series, incorporate protections that prevent the pilot from exceeding certain limits. When such protections were introduced decades ago, they created controversy. Some pilots were concerned that automated limits placed on control inputs might limit their ability to operate outside of the normal aerodynamic and performance flight regime during emergency situations. As time passed, many skeptics have come to understand that more danger may lie in overreacting to situations and producing overly aggressive control inputs that result in unrecoverable aircraft attitudes. For example, a midair collision threat may require rapid pitch and roll inputs where there is no time to consider limits. Aircraft without control input protections may allow a pilot to maneuver the aircraft away from the collision more quickly but risk structural damage by overstressing the aircraft. However, an aircraft with protections against certain inputs may be less effective at changing the trajectory but prevent overstressing the aircraft. Similar situations involve wake turbulence and wind-shear encounters. Over time, pilots are gaining confidence that fly-bywire systems with built-in protections will not allow limits to be exceeded, which promotes maneuvering to the edge of the safe flight limits, probably closer than they would dare with a non-fly-by-wire airplane in the first place. Much of the technology incorporated into modern commercial aircraft can be attributed to the new and improved design tools that are now available to aeronautical engineers. Wind tunnels, sophisticated simulators, digital computers, and design software have each contributed to the remarkable safety improvements achieved by today's jet transports. Even the Wright brothers' achievement was aided (maybe even made possible) by the wind tunnel they built to verify the density of air and the impact on airfoils. Since then, commercial aviation has come a long way in how we design aircraft and individual components, such as aerodynamic surfaces, engines, avionics on the flight deck, and systems to operate hydraulics and other key functions. Looking back in history to the roots of technology applied to aviation requires acknowledging the role played by World War II, which hastened the development of several different technologies used directly in the development and use of jet transport. The jet engine, radar, and wing sweep are three of those major technologies. The only airplanes available to the airlines in the late 1940s were propeller-driven, powered by large reciprocating engines. Efforts to increase their size and performance continuing airworthines management exposition at the expense of engine reliability. In many accidents, the loss of an engine was a contributing factor. After the initial development, it was realized that the jet engine offered improved reliability, safety, and performance. The jet engine was at its peak efficiency during high-speed, high-altitude operation. This led to a swept-wing design, which allowed greater aircraft performance. However, early operation at high speed and high altitude, near the airplane's critical Mach number, required careful Pilot technique and continuing airworthines management exposition at a cost as knowledge of hazards grew. Aircraft were lost during encounters with turbulence as pilots lost control due to aerodynamic effects at high speed, partly due to a lack of protection against losing control of airspeed. The jet transport era was ushered in during the 1950s with the advent of the British de Havilland Comet, the Soviet Tupolev Tu-104, and the American Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8. There were many flight safety issues associated with these large, swept-wing jet aircraft. This chapter focuses on the technologies that emerged in response to those issues and proved pivotal to safety as the jet frontier was opened to modern commercial aviation. Jet Engine Development Credit for the jet engine goes to two individuals who worked independently of each other just prior to and during World War II: Frank Whittle of England and Hans von Ohain of Germany. Through the efforts of General hazard analysis process Arnold, the British made Frank Whittle's work available to U.S. engine companies. General Electric ( GE) started jet engine development for the Air Force, and Westinghousem started it for the Navy. The effort at GE first produced the axial flow J-47 engine, which was used in quantity in the F-8 6 and B-47. The work of Pratt & Whitney (P&W) led to the J-57 engine used on the B-52 and Boeing 707 series aircraft. The engine manufacturers made rapid progress through the years, solving fuel consumption, noise, reliability, durability, stability, and thrust problems. The resulting improvements in jet engine performance and reliability rapidly overtook those of the piston engines, which were experiencing significant problems with increased size. The reduced complexity and frequency of maintenance of the jet engine decreased the chances of human error. Simplification of controls improved the layout and display conditions in the flight deck and also served to reduce the chances of human error. Jet airplane performance increases were tied in great part to enhancements in the efficiency of jet engines. Improvements in jet engine capability were nothing short of spectacular. Such progress resulted in engine thrust levels required by aircraft manufacturers to satisfy the ever-changing payload-range requirements. Advances in jet engines over the past half-century also reduced noise while simultaneously increasing the range of aircraft, often measured in passenger miles per pound of fuel burned. Such an evolution is particularly impressive because it has occurred jointly with great enhancements in jet engine reliability and safety. The in-flight engine shutdown rate continued to decrease to the point where a modern airline pilot may never experience an engine failure in his or her entire career. Such a claim would have been inconceivable half a century ago. Recent Developments In Jet Engine Design The air transport industry made excellent progress in jet engine developments during the first decade of the 21st century through computer-aided design and testing. Now, next-generation aircraft are making maximum use of the latest composite materials and design processes to reduce weight, improve performance, and lower maintenance costs. Lightweight composites such as graphite, kevlar, and fiberglass are being used throughout the aircraft's main structure and also as fan blades in jet engines. Additionally, the fuel performance of the latest aircraft models, such as those manufactured by Airbus and Boeing, is steadily improving, and reduced fuel consumption results in a smaller carbon footprint, including fewer C02 emissions on an aggregate level. Likewise, engine noise improvements have been achieved through the slower fan speeds and lower thrust velocity of today's modern jet engines. LONG-RANGE COMMERCIA L JET TRANSPORT ERA A great leap forward for commercial transport airplanes occurred with the development of the Boeing B-47, a military jet bomber that first flew on December 17, 1947, the 44th anniversary of the Wright brothers' first flight. It all started with the vision of a few designers to adapt this new jet propulsion system to the airplane in such a way as to take full advantage of the jet engine's performance characteristics. The Boeing Transonic Wind Tunnel (BTWT) was an invaluable engineering tool that helped establish this new successful configuration. A number of radical airframe differences characterized the experimental B-47 design: • Highly swept wing ( 35°) • High-aspect-ratio plan form ( 9.43 ) • Very wide speed range • Long-duration, high-altitude operation • High wing loading ( double that of previous designs) • Thin wing ( 12 % constant-thickness ratio) • An extremely clean aerodynamic design • Pod-mounted engines This design produced a revolutionary performance advantage, but also presented some real safety challenges requiring technological solutions. Some of these challenges were as follows: • Takeoff and landing lift requirements • Stopping-distance considerations • Control system capability over a large speed range and flutter • Structural integrity for this wing plan form and speed range These challenges were but a few of the issues that surfaced during the test program following the first B-47 flight on December 17, 1 94. An experimental flight test program was undertaken, during which many design decisions were validated and valuable lessons learned. Each of these contributed to today's jet transport safety. More than 2000 B-47s were manufactured, and the airplane remained operational until the late 1 9 60s, again contributing much to today's airplane safety. Another great leap forward continuing airworthines management exposition with the Boeing B-367- 80 ( Dash 80 ), which was the prototype for the B-707 airliner. The Dash 80 took full advantage of the B-47 experience. One significant difference from the B-4 7 was the return to a tricycle gear, which made it possible to tailor its high-lift system for takeoff and landing and to increase the weight on its wheels for improved stopping capability. HIGH-LIFT SYSTEMS Development of high-lift systems, such as movable aerodynamic surfaces on wings to increase and decrease lift as a function of phase of flight, had to keep pace with the transition from piston engine to jetliner operations. Early jet bombers used simple trailing-edge flaps and explored but did not employ leading-edge flaps. The trailing-edge flaps provided a low-drag solution to the takeoff climb-out problem but created another problem for the approach to landing. Since flap drag was low in the approach phase, glide path control was difficult, and the power setting of the engines was low, which was a critical shortcoming since it became difficult to quickly increase thrust from the engines to " go-around " power for a missed approach. With the B-47 in the landing configuration, the engines took 13 seconds to reach 60 % rpm. This means that when an aircraft had to abandon an approach and needed thrust to climb, there was a long delay until the thrust became available. Part of the solution was to incorporate multi-element slotted trailing-edge flaps, which provided the required higher drag and power settings. The remainder of the solution was to reduce the acceleration time for the engines. The addition of leading-edge flaps resulted in greater safety due to better takeoff and landing performance and greater stall margins. Leading-edge flaps were incorporated on some of the early jet transports primarily because of the different takeoff characteristics of jetliners versus piston-powered airplanes. Prop wash over the wing of propeller aircraft provides a built-in factor of safety at low speeds, enabling the airplane to continue to climb at airspeeds less than the power-off stall speeds. Leading-edge flaps on jets extend the margin of safety to even lower speeds and permit takeoff and climb-out margins similar to those in prop airplanes. The early jetliners operated into and out of a limited number of airports, and their high-lift systems were adequate for the range of altitudes and temperatures encountered at these airports. As jet travel became more economical, more number and types of airports were served, and the technology of flap systems changed to accommodate them. In the interest of shorter field-length performance, the Boeing 727 program developed a high-camber airfoil by having a highly deflected slat and a three-element trailing-edge flap system. This system provided the capability to operate at lower approach and landing speeds, giving the 72 the ability to land on shorter runways. Today's jetliners often incorporate two-position leading-edge slats to provide the low-deflection setting for low-drag takeoffs, a higher-deflection position for landing at lower speeds, and better pilot visibility from a lower deck angle. To enhance safety and improve stall characteristics while maintaining the low-camber leading edge for takeoff, the Boeing 757 added the automatic slat to its configuration. This feature provides an extra margin from aerodynamic stalls when the automatic slat actuation angle of attack is reached. This feature also provides additional maneuvering margin in the case of a wind-shear encounter. STOPPING SYSTEMS A number of improvements in aircraft stopping systems have taken place over the years, greatly enhancing safety. They include antiskid, fuse plugs, automatic brakes, speed brakes, and thrust reversers. ANTISKID BRAKING. The higher takeoff and landing speeds for jetliner operations compared with prop airliners created the need for more efficient stopping devices. An antiskid braking system was recognized as a necessity early in the jet age. Most of the time, pilots do not need the antiskid feature of brakes, especially if the runway is dry and long since the brakes are not applied hard enough to skid the tires. However, when the runway is slippery and short, the ability of the antiskid system to maximize braking effectiveness becomes very important. Early antiskid systems were developed and tested successfully on the dual-wheel main landing gear assemblies of large propeller-driven aircraft. However, the design of antiskid systems soon became a new technological challenge because of the incorporation of multiple-wheel main landing gears on the first jetliners. The early antiskid systems for the four-wheel truck main gears controlled tandem pairs of wheels. Later, the technology to control each wheel independently was incorporated to maximize the effectiveness of the antiskid system. Digital antiskid systems incorporating microprocessors enhance the reliability and effectiveness of today's modern antiskid braking systems. FusE PLUGs. Air pressure buildup in tires after braking during early high-speed rejected-takeoff tests often caused the tires to explode, sending chunks of rubber flying into the airframe. The oration of low-melting-point fuse plugs in the wheels allowed the tires to deflate safely before severely heating and exploding. automatic brakes. The incorporation of an automatic braking system is a relatively recent enhancement to safety. This system enables automatic brake application on landing or during a rejected takeoff (RTO ). The landing automatic brake system controls brake pressure to maintain aircraft deceleration at one of several pilot-selected values, provided that sufficient runway friction is available to maintain this level. The research and technology organisation automatic brake system applies full braking upon closing throttles above a fixed speed (e.g, 85 knots ). Using automatic brakes frees the pilot to concentrate on other activities, such as applying reverse thrust and directional control of the airplane to achieve a smooth, safe stop on the runway. SPEED BRAKEs. While main wheel brakes remain the primary method of stopping aircraft on the runway, the technological development of ancillary stopping devices has kept pace with the development of wheel braking systems. These devices are aerodynamic in nature but serve to enhance the efficiency of wheel brakes. The need to apply a download on the wheels was recognized as a requirement to enhance the effectiveness of wheel brakes. The use of wing sp oilers (speed brakes) to decrease lift and, therefore, increase download on the main wheels to enhance braking effectiveness was incorporated into the early jets. The percentage of wingspan covered by these devices has increased on later models, increasing their effectiveness. Implementation of automatically deployed spoilers on later models has enhanced stopping capability significantly. Sequencing of the spanwise spoilers after touchdown eliminates pitch-up, which can occur when all the spoilers are deployed simultaneously at close to airborne speeds. THRusT REvERSERs. Commercial jet transport operations into regional airports would not have been possible without thrust reversers. Although federal aviation administration regulations did not require thrust reversers, they were a must for most airline customers. It was very desirable that jetliners be able to land on slippery runways within the FAR-required field length. Early experience revealed that some types of thrust reversers lost their effectiveness at high landing speeds, which required airframe manufacturers to conduct tests to verify early reverser concepts. Designs of the Boeing 737-100 and 737-200 presented a difficult challenge in integrating the thrust reversers because the engines were mounted very close to the lower surface of the wing and very close to the ground. The initial design decision was an economic one: use the entire power package and nacelle from the Boeing 727. However, the resulting reverser configuration partially trapped the reverser efflux between the trailing-edge flaps and the leading-edge devices, creating a " bubble " of air on which the airplane floated in the ground effect, greatly reducing stopping effectiveness. A complete redesign of the reverser, including a lengthening of the nacelle to accommodate a target reverser aft of the flaps, resulted in a tremendous improvement in stopping capability. In fact, the Boeing 737-200 has such an effective reverser that the airplane can stop within its required distance on a wet runway using only thrust reversers. Low-Speed Stall Characteristics. Design of the high-lift systems was a challenge in that these systems had to provide commercial jets with safe takeoff and landing margins in all places and conditions. The system also has to exhibit satisfactory flying qualities in the extremely unlikely event of an aerodynamic stall. Early swept-wing designs exhibited poor stall characteristics because the wing tip would stall first. The remaining inboard wing lift, being ahead of the center of gravity, would give the aircraft an undesirable pitch-up tendency. Wing technology involving the selection of airfoils, wing twist, and tailoring of the leading-edge and trailing-edge flaps was initially advanced through the use of wind tunnels, then flight testing. Later, the understanding of this problem was greatly advanced through the use of computational fluid dynamics ( computational fluid dynamics ). Two technologies, the stick-shaker and automatic slat gapper, have been effective in avoiding aerodynamic stalls during both takeoff and landing. The best design philosophy is first to work on avoiding the stall. Some airfoil-wing combinations provide adequate stall warning to the pilot by disrupting airflow, shaking the aircraft so that pilots notice that a stall is imminent, an effect called wing buffeting that occurs as the stall angle of attack is approached. As high-performance wings were developed, this buffet margin was found inadequate, and a " stick-shaker " was provided. The technology of this system involved finding the best sensor and location for early notification. The automatic slat was implemented when it was found that the characteristics of a sealed slat, which had improved takeoff performance, had poor flying qualities at the stall. The solution was to open the slat gap automatically as the wing stall was approached. Stall safety was greatly improved by the use of the simulator. Early in demonstrating airplane stall and recovery techniques, it was found that the situation was too unforgiving to a pilot applying improper technique. Today, stall avoidance and recovery training are carried out safely in the simulator. Stall characteristics are thoroughly investigated during flight tests involving, in many cases, more than 700 stalls. The designer is anxious to get a stall speed as low as possible for overall safety. STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY The importance of structural integrity to commercial aircraft safety is obvious. When cracks are created in structures, they can grow to a certain size, propagate catastrophically, and ultimately lead to structural failure. Advances in the field of fracture mechanics, such as the use of materials inherently resistant to crack growth, not only prevent dramatic events such as wings separating from aircraft in flight but also extend the operational life of aircraft well beyond what many could have imagined. The life of commercial aircraft is measured in decades and, in some instances, can even span half a century. A real challenge in military aviation is the flight loads imposed on aircraft performing low-level missions, which commonly occur at or below 1,000 feet above the ground, where turbulence from the rising heated air close to the ground can impose significant structural stress on an aircraft. From a structural perspective, 1 hour of low-level flight was equivalent to 80 hours on a cruise. These lessons learned were shared with all, and manufacturers of commercial aircraft have been benefiting from these improvements in safety ever since. Several material fracture-mechanics properties continuing airworthines management exposition to light. For example, laboratory data compared the tensile strength of three different aluminum alloys as affected by the length of a crack. In the past, it was general practice to design engineering structures such as aircraft, bridges, buildings, and pipelines to a required amount of strength for an undamaged structure, plus a certain margin of safety. This factor of safety was intended to provide for degradation by corrosion, fatigue, damage, etc. It is clear today that aircraft engineering structures should be designed to maintain adequate strength not only when new and undamaged but also after they have sustained fatigue, corrosion, and damage from routine use to a level that can be perceived during a thorough inspection. A lot of credit for advancements in this area is attributed to the electron Microscope. By conducting electron microscope examinations on failure surfaces of failed structures, it became clear that each time the structure was loaded, there would be crack growth. The initiation and growth of cracks could be identified with their prior load. It was also clear that the fatigue and corrosion cracks of most aircraft materials start at the exposed surface of the material, permitting inspection for fatigue and corrosion cracks for most installations. The attention of aircraft designers became focused on the rate at which cracks grow, the strength of cracked structures, and the variation of these factors for different materials. Considerable attention was also given to understanding the loading cycles commercial aircraft would actually encounter in service. STRUCTURAL SAFETY. Criteria and procedures used in commercial airplane design over the last three to four decades have produced long-lived, damage-tolerant structures with excellent safety records. This has been achieved through diligent attention to detail design, manufacturing, maintenance, and inspection procedures. Structural safety has been an evolutionary accomplishment, with attention to detail being the key to this achievement. These design concepts, supported by scientific testing, have worked well due to the system that is used to ensure that the fleets of commercial jet transports are kept flying safely throughout their service lives. This system has three major participants ( stakeholders ): • The manufacturers that design, build, and support those aircraft in service • The airlines that operate, inspect, and maintain the aircraft • The governmental airworthiness authorities who establish rules and regulations, approve the design, and promote airline maintenance performance. Aircraft structural safety depends on the diligent performance of all participants in this system. The responsibility for safety cannot be delegated to any single stakeholder. All jet transports are designed to be damage-tolerant, a concept that has evolved from the earlier fail-safe principle. On the whole, service experience with fail-safe designs has worked very well with thousands of cases where fatigue and other types of damage have been detected and repaired. The question being debated among experts in the industry is whether the fail-safe design practices used in the 1950s and 1960s are adequate as these airplanes approach or exceed their original, useful life objectives. Note that there is almost no limit to the service life of damage-tolerant-designed aircraft structures, provided that the necessary inspections are carried out along with timely repair and replacement of damaged equipment. AGING AIRCRAFT. One of the major problems facing the federal aviation administration and air carriers today is aging aircraft. By definition, aging aircraft are aircraft that are being operated near or beyond their originally projected design goals of calendar years, flight cycles, or flight hours. Nothing in the FARs pertains directly to the useful life of an airplane as measured in calendar years, but it was customary for designers to assume approximately 20 years as the calendar life of an aircraft. For the first generation of jet transports, some designers believed that the aircraft would be technically obsolete within 20 years. Using this measure, a number of the earlier models of the DC-9s, Boeing 737s, Boeing 727s, Boeing 747s, and DC-1s still flying today would fall into this category, not to mention the DC-3 aircraft that is an astonishing 80 years old and still in commercial service. The two important measures of age are the number of flight cycles and the number of flight hours accrued in service. Both must be carefully considered. Recent regulatory changes by the federal aviation administration have clarified aging aircraft monitoring requirements. Commercial aircraft were designed and certificated in the United States after World War II in the belief that with proper inspection, maintenance, and repair, the life of the airframe could be unlimited. The foundation for this premise was the adoption of the principle of fail-safe design by the federal aviation administration and the industry in the early 1950s. This rule required that a specified level of residual strength be maintained after complete failure or obvious partial failure of a single principal structural element. The early U.S . jet and propjet fleets were designed and tested, and the federal aviation administration certified this rule without a specified life limit. The service experience acquired by this fleet by the middle to late 1 9 70s had generally shown a satisfactory level of structural safety and provided many documented instances of the validity of the fail-safe concept. However, the unusual circumstances of Aloha Airlines Flight 243 greatly accelerated the research on aging aircraft. On April 28, 1988, a Boeing 737-200 suffered an explosive decompression in flight, which required an emergency landing on the Hawaiian island of Maui. The national transportation safety board investigation report concluded that the accident was caused by metal fatigue. The age of the aircraft became a key issue (it was 19 years old ), and the 737 had sustained a remarkable number of takeoff-landing cycles, 89,090, the second most such cycles for a plane in the world at that time. The Aloha Airlines accident of 1988 focused public and congressional attention on aging aircraft. This accident and other structural failures stimulated a reexamination of the current approaches to the structural integrity of aging aircraft. This accident and other structural failures stimulated a reexamination of the current approaches to the structural integrity of aging aircraft. Fatigue-initiated damage is the primary concern about aging aircraft. When aircraft are properly inspected and maintained, corrosion and accidental damage should be managed and controlled long before the design life is reached. On the other hand, the problem of fatigue-related damage increases with time or, more properly, with prolonged use as measured by flight hours, flight cycles, or both. Fatigue damage to the fuselage is caused primarily by the repeated application of the pressure cycle that occurs during every flight. Fatigue damage to the wings is caused by the ground-air-ground cycle that occurs during every flight, pilot­induced maneuvers, and turbulence in the air. Thus, the goal of measuring aircraft structural safety by flight hours is more important for the wings than it is for the fuselage. Fatigue-related damage occurs randomly. The chance of damage due to fatigue for any given point in a structure will increase with time. Because detect­ing the damage is also probabilistic, structures must be designed so that they can withstand harm, which is a concept called damage tolerance. Such tolerance is key to preserving airworthiness. A large transport airplane is a complex structure in which a large number of points are susceptible to fatigue cracking that could propagate to the point at which the residual strength would be less than the dam­age tolerance requirement. The number of points in the structure at which cracks will initiate increases with the age of the structure. As the number of initiation sites increases, the probability increases that inspectors will not detect at least one crack before the strength degrades to the structural limit. In other words, during the aircraft life cycle, the risk of not having limit-load capability at some point in the structure may be too great for the airframe to be considered airworthy. Thus, even an airframe designed to be damage tolerant may reach a time in its life when additional inspections, maintenance, and repair will be required to maintain airworthiness. A common fatigue scenario for the fuselage includes the following: • Cracks initiate at the edges of the fastener holes in the center of the panels along a splice. • With repeated flight cycles, these small cracks link to form a patch spanning several holes. • The patch becomes sufficiently long that it is detected during scheduled checks before rapid growth occurs. Rapid growth, if it occurs, will be arrested by crack turning at the tear straps or the frame or both, resulting in a progressive, safe depressurization that permits the pilot to safely land the airplane. Although this scenario has actually occurred, it is not the only possible scenario. At least two other scenarios can be envisioned in which cracking may not be arrested by the tear straps (e.g., if the fastener holes in the tear straps already contain small cracks or if there is widespread cracking in several adjacent bays). In these circumstances, the crack may continue to propagate rapidly along the splice and lead to uncontrolled depressurization, in which case neither the tear straps nor the frame fulfill the original fail-safe function. This, in fact, is what occurred during the Aloha Airlines event. Uncontrolled crack propaga­tion resulted in the loss of a large portion of the fuselage. The structural condition described, wherein widespread cracking in tear straps and adjacent bays occurs, is called multiple-site damage (MSD). Clearly, MSD is more likely to exist in heavily used aircraft. A key factor in maintaining the safety of aging aircraft is the determi­nation of age in flight cycles, flight hours, or both, of the onset of MSD. It is assumed in analyses of this phenomenon that the airframe was designed and manufactured as intended, such that aging is related to the wear-out phase of the well-known bathtub curve. Because neither design nor manufacturing control is perfect, cracks occur in airframes long before the design goal life is reached. This is not an aging phenomenon but should be considered as the population of loca­tions in which the design or construction was deficient (i.e., local "hot spots"). Some cracks are revealed by the airplane fatigue tests, and others are revealed during the early service experience with the aircraft. As cracks are detected and corrective action is taken, the rate of new hot-spot cracking decreases with time; the net result is that the total population of crack locations at any given time would be small. Experience has shown that the risk of undetected cracks during this phase of the operational life can be controlled to a safe level by appropriate inspection and maintenance programs. Fortunately, the action taken by the federal aviation administration in the wake of the Aloha Airlines accident has been noteworthy. In 1991, the U.S. Congress passed the Aging Aircraft Safety Act, which required air carriers to demonstrate that maintenance of an air­plane's age-sensitive parts has been "adequate and timely enough to ensure the highest degree of safety." The federal aviation administration codified this legislation as the Aging Airplane Safety Rule (AASR) and requires airlines to ensure that repairs or modi­fications made to their airplanes are damage tolerant. On January 25, 2005, the federal aviation administration issued its final aging aircraft safety rule regulation, requiring repetitive inspections and record reviews every 7 years for all transport airplanes over 14 years old. In November 2007, the federal aviation administration issued Advisory Circular 120-93 to provide detailed guidance for "Damage Tolerance Inspections for Repairs and Alterations." Three years later, in November 2010, the federal aviation administration issued its final rule, which was considered a comprehensive solution to the problem of widespread fatigue in aging aircraft. This new rule seeks to prevent widespread fatigue damage (WFD) by requiring air­craft manufacturers to establish a specific number of flight cycles or hours an air­craft can operate and be free from WFD without additional inspections for fatigue. At least 4,000 U.S. registered aircraft are affected by this new rule, and if adopted worldwide, the number of affected airplanes could more than double. CABIN SAFETY: Where is the safest place to sit in an airplane? The many people who posed this question in 1985 realized that surviving an airplane crash is often possible. However, few of them also appreciated that survival and cabin safety depend a great deal more on factors other than seating position. Better emergency procedures and equipment, different cabin materials, and stronger seats can contribute to higher survival rates. In 1985, the national transportation safety board addressed the issue of cabin safety on several fronts. It issued a study on emergency equipment and procedures relating to in-water air carrier crashes. The study found that equipment and procedures were either inad­equate or designed for ditching (emergency landing on the water where there is time to prepare and that involves relatively little aircraft damage) rather than for the more common short (or no warning) in-water crashes. The national transportation safety board recommended improvements in life preservers, passenger briefings, emergency-evacuation slides, flotation devices for infants, and crew post-crash survival training. Later in the year, the national transportation safety board completed a study on airline passenger safety brief­ings. The national transportation safety board concluded that in the past, "The survival of passengers has been jeopardized" because they did not know enough about cabin safety and evacu­ation. The study also found wide variances, and sometimes inaccuracies, in oral briefings and in information on seatback-stored safety cards. Effective evacuation of an aircraft also depends on the quick action of flight attendants. In October 1985, the federal aviation administration issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to require protective breathing equipment for flight crews and cabin attendants. The national transportation safety board had recommended making this equipment available following its investiga­tion of the fatal fire on the Air Canada DC-9 at Cincinnati International Airport in June 1983. The recommendation was repeated a decade earlier after the national transportation safety board had participated in the investigation of a foreign accident involving a cabin fire. The national transportation safety board believed that without protective breathing equipment, flight attendants could easily be incapacitated by fire and smoke, could not make effective use of fire extinguishers, and could be of no use during an evacuation. In 1985, the national transportation safety board also supported a petition for rulemaking to set flight attendant flight-duty time limits. In view of public attention to the issue of cabin safety, the federal aviation administration has taken a number of regulatory actions to increase the likelihood of passenger survivability in aviation accidents. Among these improvements are the following: • Fire-blocking seat cushions to prevent fire or to mitigate its effects. federal aviation administration Advisory Circular 120-80, dated January 8, 2004 - 1/8/2004, provides detailed guidance on how to deal with in-flight fires, emphasizing the importance of crewmembers taking immediate and aggressive action. • Emergency floor lighting to improve the chances and speed of evacuation by 20% under conditions where there is significant smoke in the cabin. Improved passenger safety briefings and cabin safety data cards have also made a positive impact. • Stronger seats that must be able to withstand 1 6 times the force of gravity ( 16 g) are required for Part 121 aircraft that were built after October 27, 2009. Using a test dummy, these seats must undergo dynamic testing and evaluation to ensure they are effective in the demanding aviation crash environment. SAFETY DESIGN FOR ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS Long-duration, high-altitude, and high-speed flight can be significantly impacted by many diverse atmospheric phenomena. Four of the more important areas of con­cern include the following: • Turbulence • Wind shear • Volcanic security and hazardous materials safety • Ice and precipitation The first line of defense should always be to detect and avoid these hazards. When this strategy is impractical, the solution must address safe operations and maneuvers in the event of an adverse encounter. Great progress has been made in both areas. Turbulence Earlier, it was mentioned that very low-altitude flights impose particular stress on military aircraft operating in that regime. Operating at higher altitudes, as is com­mon with commercial aircraft, also produces encounters with turbulence that cre­ate structural stress on aircraft. To measure such an impact, aircraft manufacturers developed a velocity-load factor altitude recorder. Results of the measurements col­lected by the recorders showed the need for further research, with specific interest being the area of High Altitude Clear Air Turbulence (HICAT). Data collected in this program markedly changed the design criteria of commercial and military jet airplanes. Early in the jet era, there were a number of what are referred to as "jet upsets" from severe air turbulence encounters. A study of these encounters led to a better understanding of how to safely fly jet aircraft in such an encounter. Results indi­cated that it was important not to change aircraft trim but to disengage the early autopilot's auto-trim feature and airspeed/Mach hold only if necessary and to fly attitude and let the airspeed and altitude vary somewhat. Between 1983 and 1997, the national transportation safety board investigated 99 turbulence accidents and incidents that resulted in two fatalities and 117 serious injuries. Most of these injuries, which involved fractures of the spine, skull, and extremities-were completely preventable if seatbelts had restrained the occupants. Since 1972, the national transportation safety board has made several safety recommendations to the federal aviation administration and the National Weather Service (NWS) and has been involved in numerous investigations dealing with the hazards of turbulence. For example, in March 1993, an engine of a Boeing 747 cargo flight separated from the airplane in severe tur­bulence while departing from Anchorage, Alaska. As a result of this investigation, the Board recommended that the national weather service develop turbulence forecasts in greater detail using data from the Doppler weather radars. The national weather service has implemented this recommendation. The Board also investigated another severe turbulence encounter involving a United Airlines Boeing 74 7 in the western Pacific on December 27, 1997. This encounter resulted in one fatality and many injuries to passengers and flight attendants. The Board's investigation focused on turbulence forecasting, flight crew training, dissemination of information on turbulence, and crew proce­dures in areas where turbulence is forecast. The national weather service Aviation Weather Center and the NOAA Earth System Research Laboratory are also making progress in improving clear air turbulence and moun­tain wave forecast products. Furthermore, the federal aviation administration Aviation Weather Research program has a multidisciplinary team addressing the turbulence problem, and researchers from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) are work­ing on new algorithms for using data from the national weather service Doppler weather radars to detect turbulence. The NCAR researchers are also developing software that can turn an airborne commercial aircraft into a real-time turbulence-sensing platform. The software will use onboard sensors and computers to measure and analyze turbulence as the aircraft flies through it. The data will be transmitted to the NWS, where they will be used to create accurate, real-time turbulence maps for pilots, air traffic controllers, and dispatchers. WIND SHEAR With the increased frequency of flights, the number of wind shear-related take­off and landing accidents has also increased. The first part of investigations into wind shear involves isolating the wind profile associated with the event. Improved onboard data recorders on test airplanes showed the profiles were more severe than previously known. Additionally, the downburst phenomenon associated with certain weather conditions was discovered. A three-pronged approach was initi­ated. The first prong involved training crews on avoidance of the phenomena, the second related to better detecting the conditions that can produce wind shear and alerting the crew, and the third prong dealt with getting maximum performance from the airplane if the crew inadvertently encountered wind shear. Good-fidelity simulators were used for this analysis. In evaluating ways in which pilots can achieve the greatest performance from the airplane, it was pos­sible to use the latest technologies that were being incorporated into advanced flight decks. A very successful task force composed of individuals from the FAA, airplane manufacturers, and airlines made a great contribution to safety by producing a wind-shear training airport information desk for flight crew avoidance and procedures for getting maxi­mum performance in the presence of wind shear. Additionally, algorithms were developed, and displays were modified to provide guidance and situational aware­ness, which also enhanced flight crew performance. Another winds-aloft hazard is mountain waves, especially in high-risk areas such as Alaska and over the Rocky Mountains of the United States. The loss of a Boeing 707 near Mount Fuji in Japan was the result of such an occurrence. We still have a lot to learn about wind in the vicinity of mountains, and the supercomput­er's contribution to modeling this phenomenon gives hope for further improving the safe operation of aircraft in this environment. Further research on sensors capable of detecting these unusually adverse winds is also needed. Volcanic security and hazardous materials safety Volcanic activity has occurred throughout the world since the earliest of times. The first recorded impact on aviation was on March 22, 1944, when Mount Vesuvius did more damage to an airfield than enemy activity during that period of World War II. It was another 36 years before the next direct impact, in 1980, when a civil Lockheed C-130 Hercules inadvertently penetrated a dense security and hazardous materials safety cloud from Mount St. Helens in western Washington following its second major eruption. The aircraft lost power on two of its four engines but the crew was able to return and land safely at McChord Air Force Base. In 1982, a famous incident occurred when a British Airways Boeing 74 7 operating between London and Auckland inadvertently flew through a volcanic security and hazardous materials safety cloud of Mount Galunggung in Java, Indonesia, resulting in all four engines simultaneously flaming out. Fortunately, the crew managed to keep their composure and glide the large jet down to lower altitudes where a relight of the engines was possible. Since then, there have been several major eruptions worldwide, and they will undoubtedly continue in the future. The most serious recent volcanic security and hazardous materials safety eruption was reported on April 14, 2010 when ICAO's authority in London issued an alert that a strong security and hazardous materials safety plume was moving from the eruption of the Eyjafjallajokull volcano in Iceland toward north­western Europe. The difficulty in pronouncing the name of the volcano by non­Icelandic speakers led to the somewhat curious appellation of "E+ 15 " by some members of the airline industry when referring to the volcano. The International Air Transport Association (lATA) reported that the eruption resulted in the sudden closure of large areas of European airspace, around 100,000 flights were canceled, 10 million passengers were affected, and total economic damage reached almost 5 billion dollars. The danger of engine flameout and severe damage to the aircraft was significant for 2 weeks. The situation was so grave that the day following the start of the eruption became known as "Ash Thursday" by the airline industry. Over 17,000 flights were canceled on some days, incurring losses of some $200 million per day. Figure 8-1 shows the appearance of E+ 15 during the eruption. The risk to commercial aviation safety posed by volcanic security and hazardous materials safety cannot be over­stated. international civil aviation organization has set a maximum limit of 4 mg of silicate security and hazardous materials safety per cubic meter in the clouds associated with eruptions of volcanoes such as E+ 15 as the safe limit of security and hazardous materials safety concentration for ingestion by jet engines. When security and hazardous materials safety is ingested into a jet engine, it erodes metal, melts, forms a glassy coating on turbine blades, and can clog both fuel and cooling systems. Because the nature of security and hazardous materials safety clouds makes it difficult to measure them with accuracy, and because pilots do not have access to detection systems, nor ways of differentiating security and hazardous materials safety clouds from routine clouds with accuracy, it is prudent to avoid such cloud areas by a significant safety distance. Figure 8-2 shows the stunning range of the E+ 15 security and hazardous materials safety cloud on one of its worst days during the eruption, and therefore, makes clear the enormous disruption it created to air travel over northern Europe. In the wake of the Icelandic volcanic crisis, international civil aviation organization is currently working with European aviation authorities to improve the forecasting of volcanic security and hazardous materials safety trajectory and dispersion. A mobile radar unit will soon be deployed in Iceland to improve the accuracy and speed of information on the height of any future security and hazardous materials safety cloud. An accurate assessment of the height of the initial security and hazardous materials safety plume is critical for predicting its subsequent movement and dispersion. A coordinated European approach to this problem is in process under the "Single European Sky" initiative. It is highly desir­able to base future decisions about airspace use on scientific measurements since significant angst resulted when airspace was closed during Eyjafjallajokull's erup­tion based on theoretical models and inaccurate observations. Further research and planning is urgently required. Another volcano in Iceland named Katla could potentially pump 1 0 times more security and hazardous materials safety into Europe's skies than E+ 15. The volcano has a history of erupting every 40 to 80 years but has not done so since 1918 . It is overdue! The only positive aspect of the situation is that this Icelandic volcano, at least, has a more pronounced name than Eyjafjallajokull. Ice And Precipitation Ice and precipitation impact airplane operation in two areas. One is the effect they have on the airframe and engine, and the second is the effect on tire-ground contact. Unlike the previous atmospheric topics, these elements are daily occur­rences, with severity and likelihood of encounter depending on the season and location. Safe operations depend on a coordinated team effort by airline mainte­nance crews, flight crews, and airport authorities, as well as ground and air traffic control (ATC). There are many technologies that can help, and they depend on specific icing or precipitation conditions. Again, teamwork and procedures play an important role. Flight simulator training continues to be an effective tool in developing correct takeoff and landing procedures for ice-contaminated runways to keep safe operation possible. Developing all these procedures involves extensive wind tunnel, environmental laboratory, and flight tests to fully understand the problems and show the performance of the airplane under icing conditions. The contribution to safety in some of these cases is focused on understanding the limitations of the airplane under such adverse weather conditions. Only then is safety improved when those responsible for each aspect of the operation implement the procedures that come from these tests. In-flight icing is one of the FAA's top weather research priorities. Improved operationally available, high-resolution, accurate forecasts of atmospheric icing conditions are needed. Several safety recommendations dealing with in-flight icing were issued as the result of the NTSB's investigation of the ATR-72 accident that occurred at Roselawn, Indiana on October 31, 1994. These recommendations and the findings from the investigation provided the major impetus to the icing research efforts of the FAA. Then again on January 9, 1997, Comair Flight 3272, an Embraer 120, crashed near Monroe, Michigan, destroying the airplane and killing all 29 people onboard. There were reports of moderate icing in the area at the time of the accident. In May of the same year, the national transportation safety board issued four urgent safety recommendations regarding icing to the FAA. Almost concurrently, the federal aviation administration issued a notice of proposed rulemak­ing to modify operating procedures in icing conditions. Comair modified its operat­ing procedures based on the FAA's proposed rule, and the federal aviation administration issued a final rule. The Board also worked with the National Center for Atmospheric Research and the national aeronautics and space administration Lewis Research Center regarding weather issues. In January 1998, Board personnel traveled to Brazil, where the airplane was manufactured, to review all pertinent test data on icing and to perform studies in the engineering simulator. Issues examined regarding this accident included flight crew training, opera­tions in icing conditions, and aircraft performance. This accident resulted in several significant research activities, including the quantification of the loss of perfor­mance due to small amounts of surface roughness on a wing's leading edge and the performance penalties associated with deicing boots. In recent years, the national transportation safety board and federal aviation administration have become more definitive in the area of ice detection and prevention. On August 3, 2009, the federal aviation administration published a final rule that became effective September 2, 2009. Although the new rule does not address existing airplane designs, the federal aviation administration is considering similar rulemaking that would apply to those designs. Under the revised certification standards, new transport aircraft designs must incorporate one of three methods to detect icing and activate the airframe ice protection system: • An ice detection system that automatically activates or alerts pilots to turn on the ice protection system. • A definition of visual signs of ice buildup on a specified surface (e.g., wings) combined with an advisory system to alert the pilots to activate the ice protection system. • The identification of temperature and moisture conditions conducive to airframe icing that would alert pilots to activate the ice protection system. The new federal aviation administration standards further require that, after initial activation, the ice protection system must operate continuously, automatically turn on and off, or alert the pilots when the system should be cycled. FLIGHT DECK HUMAN-MACHINE INTERFACE The technology topics discussed to this point have dealt primarily with the design aspects of the airplane as a machine and its capability to operate safely in the atmospheric environment. This section takes a look at the technology that involves the human-machine interface. It involves the flight crew and one or more other parties: maintenance, ground operations, weather forecasters, air and ground traf­fic control, and others. In commercial aviation safety matters, it all comes together on the flight deck. The human-machine interface often becomes a determining factor in the event of an emergency, where correct, timely decisions and proper execution make the difference between life and death. As discussed earlier in this text, human factors is the science that covers the human-machine interface in an attempt to maximize the potential for safe, efficient operation while eliminating hazardous conditions result­ing from human error. Technology on flight decks has improved continuously since the early days of aviation. Notable advancements are radio communication, radio and inertial navi­gation, and approach systems. The jet engine greatly simplified cockpit controls and displays. The following are some of the flight deck technology changes that have made a significant contribution to improving safety: • Crew alerting and monitoring systems • Simple system designs • Redundant systems • Automated systems (when essential) • Moving Map displays • Engine-indicating and crew-alerting system (EICAS) • Glass cockpit displays with color enhancement • Ground-proximity warning system (GPWS) • Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) • Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (A CARS) • Flight management system (FMS) • Head-up display (HUD) EARLY FLIGHT DECK DEVELOPMENT The Boeing 707, Boeing 727, DC-8, early Boeing 747, DC-10, and L-1011 flight decks used a standard three-crew arrangement consisting of a captain, first officer, and flight engineer. Much like the previous aircraft, the airplane systems were designed for the flight engineer to be the systems operator. Large instrument panels were mounted behind and to the right of the two pilots. The flight engineer was also expected to monitor and operate the vital hydraulic, electrical, fuel, air con­ditioning, and pressurization systems with minimal supervision. The design of the short-range Boeing 737 was changed radically to provide a flight deck that only needed a two-person flight crew. To accomplish this crew reduction, the airplane systems were first simplified. The fuel system, for instance, now only has three tanks: a right-wing tank for the right engine, a left-wing tank for the left engine, and a center tank to be used by both engines. The fuel boost pump capacity, line sizes, and fuel head were designed to permit fuel from the center tank to be used first, followed by wing fuel, without any crew action following the prestart checklist. When the center fuel is depleted, amber lights inform the crew that the center tank pumps can be turned off. A cross-feed system is provided for non-normal operations. This simplified system has other benefits besides crew workload reduction. Multiple sources of power or supply are provided on all systems to ensure ade­quate system function when one or more elements have failed. Multiple hydraulic pumps are also provided, driven in different ways to provide a completely redundant system. The control system on the Boeing 727 uses cables from the control column to hydraulic actuators for normal operations. However, if the two hydraulic systems fail, a system of cables to the flight controls provides a manual reversion method of controlling the aircraft. The Boeing 757 is a newer-generation aircraft and takes a different approach to redundancy. It has three hydraulic systems, an engine pump, an electrical pump, and a ram air turbine as a backup system. This replaced the direct cable-to-control connection. The Boeing 747 is similar, with four hydraulic systems and no direct cable-to-control connection. At least one hydraulic system and pump must be operating to move the flight controls. The Airbus A-320 also requires at least one hydraulic system and pump to move flight controls. The A-320's redundancies include three hydraulic systems, two engine-driven pumps, two electric pumps, a power transfer unit (uses one hydraulic system to pressurize another), and a ram air turbine in case alternating current electric power is lost. Automatic operation of a system was also provided for selected equipment fail­ure cases to avoid the necessity of crew intervention at a critical time in flight. The Boeing 737 electrical system load-shedding feature is an example. In the event of a single generator failure on the two-generator non paralleled electrical system, the remaining generator picks up the essential load, and nonessential loads are shed. The galley power and other similar loads are shed so that the remaining genera­tor can provide all essential electrical loads without the need for crew attention or intervention. Later, when the crew has time to restore a second generator, the shed loads can be recalled. This same design philosophy has prevailed through the other two crew designs on the Boeing 757, Boeing 767, and Boeing 747-400 aircraft. Flight Deck: Boeing 757-767 And Boeing 747-400 Flight deck noise levels are low enough today to allow a true "headsets off" envi­ronment for the pilots. While the forward windshields are flat for best optical char­acteristics, the side windows are curved to prevent turbulent airflow and reduce the associated aerodynamic noise. Wind tunnel studies showed that the aerodynamic vortex created by the sharp angular change between the flat forward and flat number-two windows contributed to cockpit noise levels at cruise airspeeds. This source of noise has been eliminated in the Boeing 757/767 flight deck. The air-con­ditioning system is designed to further reduce flight deck noise by means of ducting improvements and lower airflow velocities. Vision characteristics are excellent inside and outside the Boeing 757/767. Vision through the windshields exceeds Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) recommendations, allowing pilots superior collision avoidance capabilities when visually clearing for traffic. Also, improved downward visibility and maintaining a low deck-approach angle combine to give an extra margin of safety when landing in adverse weather conditions. In this "quiet and dark" flight deck, few green or blue lights indicating normal system operation are used. Lighted pushbutton switches that combine the amber malfunction light with the shutoff switch are used to reduce the possibility of incorrect crew action. The integrated display system (IDS) in the Boeing 747-400 consists of six 8-inch square screens. Although all are identical, each performs a different function depending on its location: • Primary flight display (PFD) • Navigation display (NO) • Engine indication and crew-alerting system (EICAS) The two outboard cathode ray tubes directly in front of the pilots function as the captain's and first officer's primary flight displays (PFDs). Each pilot can use the PFD as the single source for all the primary flight instruments found on a traditional instrument panel. The tape formats used for altitude, airspeed, and heading/track indications were chosen for two reasons: (1) they permit sufficient display resolution without disrupting the "basic T" instrument configuration; (2) the tape formats more readily accommodate related supplemental information. This information, such as speed bugs and a trend vector, increases pilot situational awareness. AUTOMATION Automation has touched so many facets of today's society. The impacts of auto­mated systems are very visible in the aviation sector. For example, on the modern flight deck, automation provides pilots with information such as how much fuel will be available at the destination and where the top of a climb is in order to opti­mize the flight path and take care of many functions that were previously accom­plished by the pilot, such as calculation of takeoff and approach speeds. Although automation has solved many problems and reduced some types of workload, it is also causing new and different types of aviation safety challenges. Automation is beneficial because it can greatly airport information desk human decision-making. Two main points have led to the adoption of automation on board: the desire to reduce human error and the desire to enhance efficiency for better economic per­formance. Although humans are prone to making mistakes, with the help of com­puter-based algorithmic processes, the pros and cons of each situation can be based on facts and logic instead of other human intuition and deduction. Additionally, as the airline industry continues to grow at a fast pace, automation helps train pilots and allows them to operate aircraft at maximum economic efficiency, such as using autoflight systems that result in fuel savings. In the right setting, automation can increase capacity and productivity, reduce manual workload, and provide precise handing of routine operations. Some items that help achieve this are multifunction displays (MFDs), autopilots, auto-throttles, digital flight guidance panels, and FMS. MFDs provide numerous types of informa­tion to a pilot, depicting items such as location, system status, and even checklist steps. Having such information immediately available can reduce workload, which leaves more time for thinking and making decisions. Automatic flight systems, such as auto-throttles and the autopilot, can significantly reduce pilot workload and thus prevent pilot fatigue. FMSs are specialized computers that automate several in-flight tasks, such as managing the flight plan and estimating fuel burn and times at different navigation waypoints. These automated tools used by a proficient pilot can greatly help to manage workload and, thus, allow pilots to focus their mental abilities on items such as planning ahead and retaining situation awareness. However, there can be a dark side to automation. The CEO of Microsoft, Bill Gates, purportedly once said, "Automation applied to an efficient operation will magnify the efficiency, but automation applied to an inefficient operation will mag­nify the inefficiency." Furthermore, in addition to becoming competent at flying the aircraft, modern pilots must also achieve a high degree of proficiency in operating and supervising the automated systems. Learning how to operate different com­ponents takes time, and building the proper memory to efficiently actuate compo­nents takes even more time. A single knob can have different functions depending on how you actuate the knob and can also mask your intentions from the other pilot on the flight deck. Figure 8-3 shows a pilot reaching for a knob on the flight guidance panel of an Airbus. Pilots who do not understand automation fully can easily expect one type of automated operation to occur but then be surprised by what actually occurs, a concept known as automation surprise. Since human error is the source of many accidents, it has driven the safety philosophy behind adding more onboard automation, but human error associ­ated with designing and then using automation must also be considered. It may seem to make sense to eliminate humans from operations and, therefore, prevent accidents because of no human error, but humans are always involved in every­thing, including autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles. After all, people design unmanned aircraft, repair them, and oversee their operation. Errors can be intro­duced at any point in the cycle. Automation design philosophies need to consider striking the right balance between automation and humans because the two are complementary factors for providing flight safety. These are challenging safety areas since accidents from human error in auto­mation can be as inadvertent as a typo in a document. Many automation functions rely on a data-in, data-out structure. The output produced by the automation is directly tied to the input provided by the operator. The concept that erroneous data input will produce inaccurate outputs is sometimes referred to by the expression garbage in, garbage out. Even a minuscule error could potentially cause a whole system to fail. To address such high stakes, some pilots treat data entry as a sterile operation, meaning that crew working on any type of data entry should not have distractions such as nonpertinent conversations with other crewmembers during the data entry operation. Their attention should be solely devoted to their work to prevent them from making inadvertent errors. Emirates Flight 407 is an example of how the entry of a wrong number can have a huge impact. In 2009, the crew of Flight 407 narrowly avoided a crash dur­ing takeoff from Melbourne, Australia after someone accidently typed the weight of the plane as 262.9 tons, instead of 362.9 tons, thus resulting in the inaccurate calculation of the takeoff speed. As a result, the aircraft failed to climb once air­borne and hit structures at the end of the runway before managing to gain altitude and return for a safe landing. The future of automation training should include novel concepts such as the idea of no secret typing, meaning that all key data inputs into automation must be cross-checked by both pilots. Future safety improvements to the design of automation for flight deck use will require successful adoption of basic safety principles. First, there should be procedures and checklists that are an extension of company philosophy and oper­ating procedures for the correct amount of automation to use in different flight situations. These items can help users know what to do, for example, in the event of an automation failure. Second, aircrew should rely on training and experience to identify a correct course of action in the event of abnormal or emergency situ­ations. They should be able to make these decisions independent of automation in the case they need to rely on basic aviation principles. Similarly, pilots should work to retain basic hand-flying skills so they can still safely operate the aircraft if an automated system fails. NEW FLIGHT DECK ENHANCEMENTS Aircraft manufacturers strive to continuously improve human-machine interfaces, such as evidenced with the Boeing 777 and its new Boeing 787 "Dreamliner" air­craft. The layout of the Boeing 777 flight deck is similar to the Boeing 747-400 and has the following systems: • Glass cockpit, three-axis digital fly-by-wire flight control system. • Flight, navigational, and engine information is presented on six large display screens with advanced liquid crystal display (LCD) technology. • An integrated Airplane Information Management System that provides flight crews information regarding the overall condition of the aircraft, maintenance requirements, and key operating functions. • Ground maneuver camera system with video views of the nose and main landing gear to assist the pilot with ground handling when maneuvering at the gate area. The Boeing 787 "Dreamliner" retains operational similarity with the B-777, including fly-by-wire with a control yoke, and has the following systems: • The display screens are twice as large as the B-777, providing additional situa­tion awareness to the flight crew. An avionics full-duplex switched Ethernet is used to transmit data between the flight deck and aircraft systems. • New dual HUDs, which allow the pilots to view critical flight data on a transpar­ent display looking forward through the windscreen instead of down into the instrument panel. • New dual electronic flight bags (EFBs) which are the digital equivalent of the bulky pilot's flight bag. This includes all maps, charts, manuals, and other data for the "paperless cockpit." • New electrical architecture that replaces bleed air and hydraulic power sources with electrically powered compressors and pumps. This improvement saves weight and enhances efficiency. Competition between Boeing and Airbus remains high for new aircraft orders. The Airbus A-380 flight deck uses a similar layout to other Airbus aircraft and has the following systems: • Improved glass cockpit and fly-by-wire flight controls linked to side-sticks as in the past, with improved LCD cockpit displays. • Two primary flight displays (PFDs) dedicated to critical flight information and two MFDs that display navigation routes, moving maps, weather, and other information. These MFDs are new to the A-380, providing an easy-to-use inter­face with the FMS. • Similar to the Boeing 787, the A-3 80 uses an integrated modular avionics system with a full duplex switched Ethernet to transfer data to the aircraft systems. • The EFB, which is essentially a means for producing a paperless cockpit, is called a network systems server, which stores data such as equipment lists, navigation charts, performance calculations, and the aircraft logbook. The Airbus A-350 is the latest European aircraft following the development of the super jumbo A-380. Its flight deck has the following enhancements: • Large LCD screens with two central displays, a single primary flight and navigation display with an onboard information screen, plus a HUD on the windscreen. • The A-3 50's integrated modular avionics system manages many additional critical aircraft functions such as the landing gear, fuel, brakes, pneumatics, cabin pressurization, and fire detection systems. CREW ALERTING SYSTEMS The Boeing 737 introduced a very simple but elegant and effective crew moni­tor and alerting system. Almost all of the airplane's system controls are located overhead and are outside the normal line of sight of the two pilots. When all sys­tems are "on" and operating, no caution lights are observed. In the event of loss of equipment, an amber light annunciates the condition on the overhead panel. The loss is also repeated on master caution lights on the glare shield in front of each crewmember and in small caution panels also on the glare shield. The panel annunciation identifies the system affected, and the location of the system controls overhead. Since this was a new scheme at the time of certification, it got a lot of attention from the certification authorities and designers. To make sure that airplane system operation was not an inordinate burden and did not substantially increase work­load for the flight crew, many hours were spent in the simulator and during certi­fication flight testing to measure the time spent on airplane subsystem operation. The result of such attention workload is that less than 1 % of the crew's time from takeoff to landing is spent on system operation, including during the deliberate equipment malfunctions that were simulated by the certifying agency. This careful attention to system detail design and improvements in monitoring capability has been used for virtually all jet models subsequent to the Boeing 737. GROUND-PROXIMITY WARNING SYsTEM. Since the advent of powered flight, inadvertent ground or water contact has been a worldwide problem. While much early effort went into avoiding such accidents, no major advance occurred until the introduction of the ground-proximity warning system (GPWS) in the early 1970s. Although there has been a marked reduction in controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) accidents since then, they still occur with distressing frequency and have accounted for up to 75 % of worldwide fatalities on commercial transports. For the air carrier fleet, there are two primary reasons CFIT accidents occur: either ( 1 ) the airplane did not have GPWS (or it was inoperative) or (2) the crew received the appropriate GPWS alert but chose to ignore the alert. The Flight Safety Foundation (FSF), along with oth­ers, has an aggressive program to essentially eliminate CFIT accidents. The Enhanced GPWS, termed EGPWS, is an advanced terrain warning system used in most modern commercial airline fleets. The EGPWS improves situation awareness and increases warning times by using a terrain database that compares actual location of the aircraft to terrain in the database and uses a "look ahead" feature to detect what terrain ahead of the flight path may pose a risk. TRAFFIC CoLLISION AvoiDANCE SYSTEM (TCAS). This is an electronic aircraft collision warning system to help prevent dangerous midair collision accidents, which, as one might imagine, are often associated with great loss of life. Typically, traffic control and air navigation system requires mutual "Mode S" transponder technology, which automatically communicates with other aircraft independent of air traffic control systems to display the relative position of other such transponder-equipped aircraft. Upon detecting an intruder aircraft, traffic control and air navigation system issues a traffic advisory or resolution advisory to the flight crew to climb or descend as necessary to avoid the other aircraft. The latest version of the system is traffic control and air navigation system II, Version 7.1, which has been endorsed by international civil aviation organization and several leading regu­latory agencies. Implementation of this improved traffic control and air navigation system version is underway and provides enhancements such as the reversal of issued instructions in case one of the aircraft does not follow the originally issued instructions. ENGINE-INDICATING AND CREW-ALERTING SYSTEM. The engine-indicating and crew-alerting system (EICAS, or ECAM for Airbus aircraft) is a digital computer system that monitors and indicates propulsion and airplane subsystem information for the operation and maintenance of the airplane. EICAS/ECAM interfaces with many airplane components and subsystems. Discrete inputs are implemented in a hierar­chy that reflects operational and maintenance requirements: • Flight crew alert messages duplicate dedicated subsystem information (usually indicator lights) elsewhere in the flight deck. • Status and maintenance messages provide lower-priority information on the condition of many subsystem components. New Airbus and Boeing aircraft models have improved EICAS/ECAM to enhance functionality and reduce the display footprint on the flight deck. Each manu­facturer has its own strategies for engine indications and crew alerts, but all per­form essentially the same basic functions. AIRCRAFT CoMMUNICATIONS ADDRESSING AND REPORTING SYSTEM The Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) is a communication datalink system that sends messages, using digital technology, between an airplane and the airline's ground base. The operational features of aircraft communication addressing and reporting system equipment and the ways in which aircraft communication addressing and reporting system is used in service vary widely from airline to airline. There is nothing new about sending messages between the airplane and the ground. What makes aircraft communication addressing and reporting system unique is that messages can be sent, including fuel quantity, subsystem faults, and air traffic clearances, in a fraction of the time it takes using voice communications, in many cases without involving the flight crew. The Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System relieves the crew of having to send many of the routine voice radio messages by instead down­linking preformatted messages at specific times in the flight. These may include the time the airplane left the gate, liftoff time, touchdown time, and time of arrival at the gate. In addition, aircraft communication addressing and reporting system can be asked by the airline's ground operations base to collect data from airplane systems and downlink the requested information to the ground. Each aircraft communication addressing and reporting system message is compressed and takes about 1 second of air time to transmit. Because of the automatic reporting functions described above, the num­ber of radio frequency changes that flight crews must make is reduced on ACARS-equipped airplanes. Sending and receiving data over the aircraft communication addressing and reporting system network reduces the number of voice contacts required on any one flight, thereby reducing commu­nication workload errors and costs. Such messages were previously transmitted via voice by one of the pilots and often occurred during very inopportune moments of high workload. The accurate reporting of event times, engine information, crew identifica­tion, and passenger requirements provides for close control of any particular flight. Airplane system data, such as engine performance reports, can be sent to the ground on a preprogrammed schedule, or personnel on the ground may request data at any time during the flight. This allows ground personnel to observe the engines and systems and can alert them to problems to be investigated. Improvements in aircraft communication addressing and reporting system technology have been implemented in approxi­mately 2,000 aircraft to transmit aircraft communication addressing and reporting system messages and data communications from air traffic controllers known as Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC). Voice communications are easily misunderstood, and voice frequencies are easily overloaded. CPDLC was proposed by the federal aviation administration as a new strategy to cope with the increased demands on air traffic control and has proven very effective and efficient during operations in busy en-route airspace. FLIGHT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM The flight management system (FMS) is an integration of four major systems: the flight management computer system (FMCS), the digital flight control system (DFCS), the auto-throttle (AfT), and the inertial reference system (IRS). The basic functions of the flight management system are as follows: • Automatic flight control • Performance management • Precision navigation • System monitoring: The flight management system is designed to allow crew access to the total range of aircraft perfor­mance, navigation, and advisory data computation capability at any time and in any flight control mode. For example, when the airplane is under manual control, the pilots, at their option, can get flight optimization data from the flight manage­ment computer and appropriate target airspeeds. The flight management computer is a major innovation in the flight management system design. In addition to navigation, it performs real-time, fully automatic performance optimi­zation and can control the airplane through the flight control system, including the auto-throttle. While crews currently determine the most efficient speed and altitude by using the flight operations manuals and calculators, this function is usually per­formed only periodically. Further, because it is a digital system, the software and programmable databases in the flight management system provide the adaptability and growth needed for present and future airline operations, particularly as navigation and air traffic control systems evolve. Multiple FLIGHT Control Computers On newer-generation aircraft, elevator/aileron computers (ELACs) have pri­mary control of elevators and ailerons and perform the computations for spoilers and yaw damping. One ELAC is active, while the other is a backup. Spoiler/elevator computers (SECs) provide primary control of spoilers. If both ELACs fail, the SECs also provide backup roll and pitch control via spoilers and elevators. Flight augmentation computers (FACs) control the rudder for turn coordination and yaw damping. They also compute limits for the flight envelope, wind shear, and speed information displayed on the primary flight display. Multiple redundant computer flight control systems ensure that no single fail­ure of an electrical, hydraulic, or flight control component will result in a reduction in operational capability. CENTRAL MAINTENANCE CoMPUTER SYSTEM One technology that is able to assist in ensuring the operational status of complex systems is the central maintenance computer system (CMCS). This technology can collect, display, and provide reports of fault information and test airplane systems. It provides ground maintenance personnel with a centralized location for both testing and access to maintenance data. The net result is a decrease in airplane turnaround time and an increase in dispatch reliability over previous-generation airplanes. The CMCS was developed to monitor and troubleshoot the complex and inte­grated systems on the Boeing 747-400. It was also created to centralize ground testing, fault information storage, and real-time data monitoring. In previous­generation airplanes, testing, troubleshooting, and fault isolation were confined to a system-by-system approach, and faults that affect multiple systems were often difficult to isolate. Because so many systems on the Boeing 747-400 are interdepen­dent, a fault in a single system can ripple through several other systems. Since the CMCS is linked to all major systems, it can provide simultaneous fault monitoring for related systems and can reduce multiple fault indications to a single fault. The latest Airbus system for real-time aircraft maintenance is known as AIRcraft Maintenance ANalysis (AIRMAN), which is an intelligent software sys­tem designed to optimize maintenance and minimize aircraft turnaround time on the ground. AIRMAN constantly monitors the health of the system, tracks main­tenance that has occurred on the aircraft and has the clever feature of prioritizing troubleshooting steps by likelihood of success. MODELING, DESIGN, AND TESTING TOOLS Airplane design and technological progress seen in this century could not have hap­pened without parallel advancements in computing capability. This was no coinci­dence, for in many cases, computer science was trying to solve airplane technology problems. Major breakthroughs for the computer (and all avionics, for that matter) were the vacuum tube, the transistor, and the microprocessor. The computer advancements made to date are what enabled not only all the onboard and support avionics systems but also all the analysis and testing that go into them. It is not possible to cover all this technological progress, as it has been explosive on all fronts. The important part of incorporating any technology is to first make sure it has been analyzed and tested thoroughly. Some of the technolo­gies that have made contributions to commercial aviation safety are discussed next. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS ( CFD) Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods have been used extensively in the design of all new-generation aircraft. Advances in supercomputing technology over the years have allowed computational fluid dynamics to solve problems of greater relevance to aircraft design. The use of these methods allowed a more thorough aerodynamic design earlier in the development process, allowing greater concentration on related operational and safety-related features. WING DEsiGN. The ability of computational fluid dynamics to solve the inverse problem, which means determining an optimal geometric shape in order to achieve a desired flow, revolutionized the transport wing design process. Since the Wright brothers' time, wing design has been a "cut and try" operation, which is an expression more widely referred to as a trial and error approach. The "try" would take place in the wind tunnel or in flight. The advent of sufficiently powerful computational methods allowed some of the tries to be shifted to the computer. The "cut" was the designer shaping the wing based on experience and intuition. computational fluid dynamics allows a new approach in which the design engineer specifies the aerodynamic pressures desired on the wing to the computer, and the computational fluid dynamics code computes the geometric contouring of the wing surface that will produce those pressures. The engineer does all the design works, the initial evalua­tion with computational fluid dynamics picks the best candidates and then builds the best wind tunnel models to test the new design. This inverse design technique was first used in the development of the Boeing 777, which sets a new standard for all future aircraft to follow, allowing achieve­ment of a level of aerodynamic performance not otherwise possible in a time­constrained development program. The computational fluid dynamics methods used for this application were based on nonlinear potential equations coupled with boundary-layer equa­tions to account for viscous effects. The key to this use of computational fluid dynamics was the ability to model enough relevant physics and gain a quick turnaround from initial geometry to a completed solution. The resulting wing designs are thicker and lighter than their previous counterparts. These characteristics allow wings with greater span or less sweepback. Both features are conducive to better low-speed (landing and takeoff) performance, improved safety margins, and reduced aircraft noise. Today, computational fluid dynamics is being used to address better the diverse requirements for nacelle design for a cruise, engine-out second-segment climb, and engine-out extended-range twin-engine operations (ETOPS). Nacelle design is being optimized to minimize drag at cruise conditions and provide acceptable engine-out drag for second­segment climb and ETOPS. Engine-out drag is not the only criterion of merit. If external flow separation occurs, the separation wake could impinge on other air­craft components, causing premature buffeting of the aircraft, perhaps indicating to the pilot that the aircraft is approaching stall conditions. If it is severe enough, the pilot might be inclined to reduce the angle of attack- a situation not desired dur­ing takeoff or climb out. computational fluid dynamics has become a very valuable tool for designers to provide additional safety benefits that might not otherwise have been feasible. Wind-Tunnel Benefits Today, wind tunnel testing complements the computational fluid dynamics tools, which focus efforts on a narrower field of configuration options. During the develop­ment of the Boeing 767 in the late 1970s, the manufacturer conducted tests in 15 tunnels in four countries for more than 20,000 hours, conducting 100,000 data runs. Each run recorded an average of 65 independent parameters at approximately 25 different aircraft attitudes. In that Boeing 767 program, more than 100 variations of the wing design and untold numbers of different flap and slat positions were tested. Despite intensive use of CFD, the test program for the Boeing 777 involved about 20,000 hours of wind-tunnel testing up to the first flight. The value of wind tunnel testing goes beyond the optimization of wing designs and performance. The results contribute to information about safety involving load determination for structural design, simulator database development, stability, and control characteristics for both normal and failed configurations and aircraft anti­icing control. The effective and efficient integration of propulsion systems onto the airframe is served, in part, by powered models that provide simulations of installed engines' flow fields. FLIGHT SIMULATION The flight simulator was recognized very early as a valuable tool in improving air­craft safety. It owes a lot to the pioneering efforts of Ed Link. Early in the initial transition of crews from props to jets, a number of training accidents occurred, par­ticularly during engine-out training. It endangered not only those in the airplane but also those on the ground. The technology that allowed this hazardous training to occur in a simulated environment on the ground was a great benefit to flight safety. Development of the simulator took two parallel paths, one for engineering evaluation and the other for flight training. Each benefited the other. The engineer­ing simulation allowed the engineer and the test pilot to evaluate design options during design and to define the best operating procedures. It has also been used to evaluate accident and incident data to better understand what might have gone wrong and to find solutions. At first, simulators were very crude. The engineering simulators were analog and could fly the initialized flight condition on instruments only. Later, a model board was constructed to represent a bird's - -eye view of a large ground area using a miniature TV camera and closed-circuit TV that "flew" over the land­scape model to provide an accurate view out of the cockpit window. This feature greatly improved the evaluations that one could perform, but it had limitations. Computer-generated imagery (CGI) was the real breakthrough. It allowed weather and a variety of airports to be evaluated. This technology continues to advance and is providing more and more realism with full flight simulators featuring three-axis motion platforms and 360-degree, outside-world visual projections. FLIGHT TEST The ultimate test of an airplane before it enters active service is when it goes through flight testing and is subjected to a real-world environment. Flight test­ing has had to advance in four areas to keep pace with the jet airplane's advanced performance, expanded flight envelope, and the advanced technology incorporated into the airplane systems. These four areas include the following: 1. New flight-test techniques 2. Improved accuracy of instrumentation 3. Improved data-recording systems 4. Real-time monitoring and data analysis These advances have made it possible to conduct increasingly accurate and thorough tests to ensure that the airplane is ready for service. Typical of such tests is the takeoff minimum unstick speed, abbreviated VMU', which is the minimum airspeed at which an airplane can safely lift off the ground and continue takeoff. This test demonstrates the takeoff performance margin existing at unstick (takeoff) speed, ensuring that the airplane will not encounter a hazardous condition such as loss of control or failure to accelerate. This is one of the key tests to ensure that engine thrust is maintained; the control and flap systems function as designed, and control and flap systems provide the airplane with the low-speed, high-angle-of­attack controllability needed for safe operation. This test is also used to establish required operational parameters for takeoff field length. Flight tests such as this one have greatly contributed to the safety of the commercial airplane. Accident/INCIDENT INVESTIGATION The industry has always devoted a lot of effort to the technologies involved in find­ing causes of incidents and accidents. The flight data recorder (FDR) and cockpit voice recorder (CVR) are indispensable tools in this task. Substantial progress was made during 1987 in the NTSB's goal of persuading the federal aviation administration to require more and better cockpit voice recorders and flight data record­ers aboard aircraft. However, efforts by the national transportation safety board to upgrade requirements for the use of FDRs and CVRs to take advantage of newly available technology have often faced a long, uphill battle. Over the years, the national transportation safety board had difficulty persuading the federal aviation administration to improve recorders on larger commercial jets and expand their use on commuters and some corporate aircraft, despite the proven value of recorders as a vital tool in accident investigations. The federal aviation administration had issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to upgrade recorder requirements but failed to act on it for more than 2 years, despite national transportation safety board prod­ding. On March 25, 1987, however, the Secretary of Transportation announced a requirement for installation of CVRs on newly manufactured turbo propeller commuter aircraft carrying six passengers or more and having two pilots. The secretary also called for the installation of digital flight data recorders on older jet aircraft, replacing the foil-type versions that were then required. The announcement continuing airworthines management exposition after a commuter plane accident at Detroit Metro Airport on March 4 of that year, which dramatically helped focus congressional and public attention on the stalled flight recorder rulemaking. Just 2 weeks after the accident, a congressional panel approved report language directing the federal aviation administration to "take immediate steps to require the installation of cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder devices on all commuter aircraft in line with national transportation safety board recommendations." The number of flight data recorder data channels and the crashworthiness of these vitally important records have increased significantly. The early generation of FDRs only recorded time, altitude, airspeed, vertical acceleration, heading, and the radio trans­mission event marker. The number of parameters has now increased so that today, with all-digital avionics systems onboard the new airplanes, a more detailed record can be made and stored for a longer time. This area is another way in which digital avionics contribute to aircraft safety. The Boeing 787 Dreamliner is the first aircraft equipped with enhanced air­borne flight recorders (EAFRs), a combined cockpit voice and flight data recorder (CVR/FDR) with crash-protected memory, and the capability to record datalink messages and cockpit imagery. In 2002, the national transportation safety board added crash-protected image recorders to its Aviation Most Wanted Safety Improvement List of items needing urgent attention by the FAA; therefore, the development of cockpit image recorders will be a future issue in the area of accident investigation. CONTROL STRATEGIES TO MANAGE THREATS AND ERRORS Effective control strategies to manage threats and errors include engineering-based tools associated with the aircraft, such as cockpit automation, instrument displays, or warning devices. For example, the GPWS is a so-called "hard" defense mecha­nism to prevent controlled flight into terrain with visual and audio warnings to "pull up." A yoke "stick shaker" or stall warning horn would be another example of an engineering control strategy to warn pilots of low airspeed and possible stall situations. There are other control strategies that are more administrative in nature. The so-called "soft" defenses, such as checklists, rules and regulations, standard operat­ing procedures, etc., are used to direct crewmembers to take appropriate action under a given set of circumstances. Using CRM, LOSA, and Threat-and-Error Management (TEM) training concepts, modern airline crews are now taught the newest techniques and communication skills to avoid human error entirely, trap it from spreading into an undesired aircraft state, or finally, mitigate the con­sequences of the error through anticipation, error recognition, and ultimate recov­ery from the undesirable human error problem. Airbus And Boeing Design Strategies With the rapid growth in microprocessor technology in the past three decades, there has been a temptation on the part of some designers to build very complex systems based on the rationale that the systems could operate automatically. There are two major fallacies in this argument. First, almost no major system on an aircraft truly operates fully automatically. Systems must be initialized or set up by humans, decisions about operating modes must be made, and then the systems must be monitored by humans for obvious reasons. Second, in the event of the failure of automation, it always falls to humans to operate the system. This responsibility cannot be avoided or designed away. If the complexity of the system is unbridled, then the crew may not be able to perform their duties effectively or take over in the event of equipment failure. In response, many design engineers with human factors sophistication have recognized that simplification offers an attractive alternative to automation. If the system can be simplified, there may be no need for complex automation, and the same goal can be achieved without placing the human in a potentially hazardous position. An example is the fuel system on a multiengine aircraft. Those favoring automation would find no problem with creating a complex tank-to-tank and tank-to-engine relationship as long as its management could be automated. If, for example, a fuel imbalance were created, automatic devices would detect the imbalance, determine a remedy, open the required transfer valves, and turn on the appropriate pumps to restore the proper balance. No human intervention would be required. This example represents a philosophical difference between two major aircraft manufacturers- Airbus and Boeing, as previously expressed in the chapter. The Airbus general approach has been to remove the pilot from the loop and turn cer­tain functions over to sophisticated automation. Aircraft compliance with the input is automatic -the computer systems do not ask for the crew's approval. Boeing's approach, however, is never to bypass the crew: Sophisticated devices inform the crew of a need and, in some cases, a step-by-step procedure, but in the end, it is the crew who must authorize and conduct the procedure. Boeing is a strong advocate of simplification before automation. Their designers would look to a less complex relationship. An example would be fewer tanks to feed the engines, creating fewer tank-to-tank and tank-to-engine requirements, requiring less management by the crew and fewer opportunities for human error. One of the potential difficulties with highly automated systems is that onboard computers may, unknown to the crew, automatically compensate for abnormal events. Efficient automatic reaction to abnormal events and conditions sounds attractive, but there is always a limit to the system's capacity to compensate. When automation is reacting to a worsening condition without the crew's knowledge, this can lead to a situation where it may be too late for the crew to override the system and thus prevent a catastrophe -hence our theme to Chapter 4, "Humans as the Solution." FLIGHT DECK STANDARDIZATION It is desirable to ensure that the automation and systems operated by pilots are relatively similar between different types of aircraft in a given airline. Doing so reduces training costs and prevents negative transfer of habit patterns as pilots transfer between aircraft types during a career. Maintenance costs are also reduced from such an approach. During periods of rapid expansion of aircraft inventories and pilot personnel, there is frequent movement between aircraft as pilots bid for more lucrative or convenient assignments, more modern aircraft, or more desirable bases. Some airline labor contracts limit the rapidity with which pilots may bid for a new seat; others do not. Most flight deck hardware is peculiar to the type of aircraft. However, certain flight deck hardware could be common to most or all models operated by a carrier; examples are radios, flight directors, certain displays, area navigation equipment, and weather radar. Other examples would be devices added after the original man­ufacture (e.g., TCAS, ACARS). When the carrier has the opportunity to purchase these add-on units, a common model will most likely be chosen for all the reasons stated above. Where differences already exist between fleets, the airline may intervene by standardizing procedures throughout the airline. For example, some airlines have invested in a common airline-wide model of the flight director, which is a type of automated information presentation for pilots to help with precise aircraft control. Between-fleet standardization, if it involves retrofit rather than new equipment purchase, will be extremely costly, and its safety benefits may be modest compared to within-fleet standardization. Nonetheless, when pilots move rapidly through the seats of various aircraft or complete training for one aircraft and then return to another while awaiting assignment to the new aircraft, fleet standardization of flight deck hardware deserves inclusion in the list of intervention strategies against human error. Within-fleet standardization is a far more critical issue. Long before the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, carriers purchased aircraft from one another, thus gener­ating mixed aircraft configurations within fleets. With the coming of deregulation, the pace of mergers and acquisitions, as well as used equipment purchases and leases, accelerated rapidly, causing a safety issue regarding flight deck configuration. These differences included different displays (e.g., various models of flight direc­tors), warning and alerting systems (e.g., a host of altitude warning systems with various trigger points), every imaginable engine configuration, control in different locations, various directions of movement of switches, and various operating limitations. One carrier, which had been through a number of mergers and acquisi­tions of other DC-9 operators, had eight different models or locations of altitude alerts. It later invested a very considerable sum to standardize the flight deck of its DC-9 fleet. Within-fleet standardization is considered a high-priority item by line pilots, airline pilot unions, and safety committees. Southwest Airlines is a good example of a successful flight deck standardization program, focusing on the mod­ern Boeing 737 as its basic configuration. FLIGHT DECK AUTOMATION AND PRECISION NAVIGATION In today's modern commercial aircraft, computer technology and the "glass cock­pit" have become the norm. Navigation is accomplished electronically on moving maps using the latest techniques to enhance the situational awareness of the pilot. Nevertheless, as we have learned, the human error element is always present and must always be actively monitored by the crew. A good example of a human error occurred onboard a Boeing 767 preparing to depart Atlanta for Miami. The clearance included TEPEE (note spelling) as a GPS waypoint, representing an intersec­tion near Tampa, Florida. The captain entered TEEPE (note the different spelling) into the route page of the control display unit (CDU). Because there is a TEEPE intersection in Texas, the CDU dutifully accepted the erroneous spelling and estab­lished it as a waypoint on the route from Atlanta to Miami. The sudden shift in course to the west-southwest toward TEEPE from the southward course toward TEPEE was immediately evident to the crew. A non-EFIS aircraft with the same CDU flight management system (such as some models of the Boeing 737-300) would not have provided this form of error detection capability. The crew would have had to detect the error by some other check or the hard way when a violation had been issued by an air traffic controller noticing the navigational deviation. Once the aircraft system properly displays an abnormal condition, there must be an effective means of removing it and allowing the system to recover. The sys­tem must not permit irreversible errors. With traditional aircraft, this was not a problem since, working with less sophisticated systems, the pilots were closely coupled to the machine, and they could usually detect and correct an error or unde­sirable system state quite quickly. The advent of highly sophisticated automation raises the question of escaping from error and system recovery. Generally, the prob­lem is not that the error is irreversible but that a complicated recovery process can be difficult, time-consuming, and possibly error-inducing. Nevertheless, the modern flight management system offers some novel features for protection against human error. It can store and process a vast amount of information typi­cally contained in manuals, checklists, performance charts, flight plans, weather reports, documents, and paperwork of all sorts. This information can be displayed to the crew in text, numeric, and graphic forms on selected pages of the control display unit, the glass instrument panels, and elsewhere. Some of the information is automatically displayed, requiring no request from the crew (e.g., the wind vector on the navigation display); other information is available in the flight management system on demand through pilot selection of the correct CDU page. The display of certain valuable information, such as suitable emergency airfields, is switch selectable. Finally, if the flight management system detects an abnormal computer condition, a brief message can be displayed in the "scratch pad" line of the CDU, and the pilot is alerted on two other displays that an flight management system message is waiting. An example would be a request for a waypoint "not in the database." The Boeing 767/757 and the glass cockpit aircraft that followed possessed rudimentary forms of computer-based error elimination and protection. The Airbus A-320, introduced in 1988, took error protection a step further. The fly-by-wire feature offered the opportunity to fly maneuvers, such as maximum safe angle of attack (AOA) for wind-shear escape maneuvers, with no danger of entering a stall. The computer would simply stop the aircraft's increase in pitch short of its com­puted safe AOA. If the pilot continued to pull back on the stick, the aircraft would not allow any more nose-up pitch. An intelligent computer interposes an elec­tronic line of defense between the pilot's control and the aircraft's control surfaces. Incidentally, such a system that has the capability of controlling and correcting an error is referred to as an error-resistant or error-tolerant system. Other EFIS aircraft, such as the Boeing 757/767, offer escape guidance on the attitude indicator in the form of a target line for optimal nose-up pitch. In contrast with the approach taken in the A-320 design, the pilot always remains in the loop in the Boeing aircraft. The pilot controls the pitch angle; the computer merely com­putes and displays the commanded nose-up pitch. These two approaches emphasize not only disparate views of cockpit design but also basic philosophical design differences previously mentioned in this chapter. The Airbus family of aircraft essentially allows the pilot to pull the control stick all the way back and let the computer find the maximum angle of attack that will avoid a stall. Other EFIS-equipped aircraft depend on the pilot to follow the wind­shear escape guidance cues. Each approach has positives and negatives, so it is hard to say which approach is more effective. Only time, experience, years of accident investigation statistics, and academic studies will settle that question. NEWER AIRCRAFT TECHNOLOGIES The technological opportunities for continued improvement in flight safety are as good as ever. The analytical tools, computing capability, simulation, and testing capability all far exceed those of the past, and new technologies are continuing to unfold. These opportunities are challenging to all engaged in the aviation safety community. Of all the technologies available for improving safety while providing substan­tial gains for future growth, system capacity, and efficiency, electronic technology appears to have the most immediate promise. Accident statistics continue to bear out the fact that aircraft manufacturers need to assist flight crews in doing their tasks while improving the efficiency of operation. Chip-level redundancy combined with fault-tolerant design will provide far greater reliability levels for essential and critical functions. Aircraft safety and total system capacity and efficiency will undoubtedly be enhanced in the future. Boeing and Airbus are already using a number of these features on their next-generation aircraft. WEATHER DETECTION Weather remains a major cause of delays and accidents. Real-time, accurate knowl­edge of the weather ahead is required. Aircraft must be able to detect weather conditions, alert the flight crew to avoid dangerous situations, and effectively cope with turbulence, precipitation, and wind shear. Today's airborne weather radar technology needs improvement, as does the training that pilots receive on adjusting radar settings to deliver the desired informa­tion for weather avoidance. Furthermore, the current air carrier fleet is often lim­ited to a simple view of the weather, and we need a real-time, "big picture" integrated display. The future will likely bring advanced airborne weather radar with vertical as well as cross-sectional views. Ground and satellite weather detection improve­ments made available on the flight deck will combine to enhance flight planning, performance, and safety. Onboard system enhancements to airport information desk the pilot in unexpected wind-shear encounters are being incorporated on current aircraft. These wind-shear alert and guidance systems are being combined with crew training, improved ground-based alerting, and weather radar systems. Emphasis is on detection and avoidance of hazards occurring along the flight path. If wind shear is unavoidable, the wind­shear system quickly alerts the crew and provides pitch attitude guidance to effect the most optimal escape maneuver. Improvements are also planned to the current ground-based, low-level wind-shear alert system. Terminal Doppler weather radars will continue to be installed at critical airports. Communication And Navigation Systems As will be discussed at length in Chapter 10 on air traffic system technologies, avi­ation is transitioning toward a new communications, navigation, and surveillance/ air traffic management (CNS/ATM) environment. This will inevitably change the way pilots communicate and navigate. For starters, most air traffic control messages would be sent by datalink to and from the airplane rather than by voice. Navigation would be based more on satellites than on land-based navigation aids, and traffic surveillance would be achieved by net­working tactical information among all aircraft. The benefits of these changes, particularly to the airlines, are potentially enormous. A global navigation and com­munications system will allow for higher traffic density and improved safety while at the same time enabling airplanes to fly at optimum altitudes and on more direct routes. Voice mode will still be essential for emergencies and other nonstandard communication, but for the most part, tomorrow's flight decks will be much qui­eter without the perpetual stream of air traffic control chatter heard through radio frequencies on traditional flight decks. As envisioned, the transition from today's airspace environment, in which routes are rigidly assigned by controllers on the ground, will move first to a system in which flight plans originate in the airplane and are approved by controllers on the ground. Then, at some point, perhaps flight plan changes will be initiated in the airplane in real time and simply monitored from the ground. However, this does not mean that conventional terrestrial navigation systems will disappear overnight. In the United States, the federal aviation administration plans to keep very high-frequency omnidirectional range (VOR) and distance-measuring equipment (DME) in operation for at least another decade. During this time, pilots' dependency on the equipment will decrease as more flight operations use satellites to navigate. However, the susceptibility of GPS to interference probably means VORs will be around for a long time to come, as most observers believe. The future will bring increased capabilities, some of which will include digital communications to accommodate high-speed data to and from the cockpit, WAAS/ GBAS approaches and landings, GPS-based en route navigation, and automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) procedures allowing new sophistication in flight tracking and traffic avoidance. Also during this time, today's very high frequency voice communications will slowly give way to increased digital communications, and surveillance systems will become more sophisticated, moving away from today's Mode S transponders, air traffic control surveillance radar, and Traffic and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) to the modern ADS-B system of the future. The result will be a better near-range picture of traffic and, therefore, call for far fewer callouts of other aircraft by air traffic controllers. There is a tremendous need to provide data to the flight deck from the ground. In the future, digital communications are expected to make today's very high frequency communi­cation radios obsolete, even those that are now undergoing updates for 8.33 kHz requirements in Europe. The new infrastructure will require radios that can transmit in both voice and high-speed digital formats. The very high frequency Datalink (VDL) Mode 2 system is already in operation, and the federal aviation administration has already proven the efficiency of the CPDLC system in high-density air traffic areas. ADS-B avionics that are under development include a cockpit display of traffic information (CDTI) feature that enables the pilot to "see and avoid" other aircraft electronically. Figure 8-4 shows an experimental national aeronautics and space administration CDTI taking the place of a traditional flight deck navigation display, depicting a traffic conflict requiring pilot-selected de-confliction when flying under autonomous flight rules versus relying on air traffic control for de-confliction. Using modern ADS-B technology, aircraft emit signals that tell their position to other similarly equipped aircraft in the area. This information is depicted visually on display on the flight deck and will greatly enhance a pilot's awareness of the position of other ADS-B-equipped aircraft and lead to safer operations. The United Parcel Service's (UPS) efficient use of CDTI at its hub in Louisville has proven that substantial fuel savings can also be gained by the use of ADS-B en route descent technology. By reducing dependency on voice transmissions, the pilot workload will presum­ably be greatly reduced. For en-route applications, communications via datalink will be implemented first. Most observers agree it will probably be at least a decade before we see heavy use of digital communications in the terminal area. The transition from voice to digital communications will evolve fairly slowly, observers believe, first because pilots need to become more comfortable with the idea of sending and receiving information in this format. The second reason is that thousands of older airplanes will require new avionics to receive and send data via digital link. Avionics makers must also develop new radios that can be updated through software changes rather than expensive hardware upgrades. If we have learned anything from the personal computer industry, it is that the new technology con­stantly being developed can quickly make yesterday's equipment obsolete. The challenge for aviation will lie in developing avionics systems that have reasonably long, useful lives at a reasonable cost. The potential for change and innovation in the navigation and communica­tions infrastructure is limitless, and when it finally evolves, the modern flight deck will be a markedly different place from what it is today. FLIGHT DECK DISPLAYS Most observers did not imagine that the LCD would replace the cathode-ray tube as quickly as it did. Advances in commercial LCD production, however, helped bring costs down, while avionics makers enhanced off-the-shelf products for unmatched levels of fidelity. Today, all new avionics suites for jets are being designed around large-format LCDs. Just how big the displays will grow depends largely on what happens in the market for commercial LCDs. The future vision of avionics makers is to use displays that spread across the entire flight deck someday. Some are looking at new technologies such as gas­plasma displays or projection displays to meet this goal. For now, however, the LCD is the most cost-effective way to bring the information needed for tomorrow's flight environment to the flight deck. Using LCDs, avionics makers plan to integrate terrain, traffic, and weather information and display it on top of charts and approach plates, which will pro­vide a seamless source for information layered in such a way that pilots can better interpret the overall flight situation. Tomorrow's flight deck will be more depen­dent on sophisticated computer software that will greatly enhance the capabilities of the avionics, while at the same time adding to the complexity of computer sys­tems. To help pilots better manage the technology, cursor-control devices, similar to a computer mouse, will be used at first to scroll through simple menus and later to plan entire flights. Figure 8-5 is an example of a multi-functional display show­ing superimposed, real-time weather and navigation information during Hurricane Irene in 201 1 . Displays such as this, which show a combination of aircraft, meteo­rology, and navigation information, are typical of those being installed in many modern flight decks. HEAD-UP DISPLAYS (HUDs) Head-up displays will become much more commonplace in tomorrow's flight decks, experts believe, particularly if manufacturers can bring costs down. A number of HUD makers may shift their engineering focuses and begin looking at the use of smaller lenses and direct-projection HUDs, such as those used by the military in the C-1 7. This would eliminate the need for the large optics projectors and image collimators used today, making the systems far simpler to install and maintain. Head-up displays present vital aircraft performance and navigation information to the pilot's forward field of view. The information on the HUD is collimated so that symbols appear to the human eye to be at infinity and overlaid on the actual outside scene. Figure 8-6 shows how symbols appear to a pilot looking through the HUD. The use of HUDs is gaining broad acceptance in aviation as flight crews real­ize the tremendous benefits to situational awareness that they can provide. Also, use of the new enhanced flight vision system (EFVS), a display that allows pilots to see through low-visibility weather, could become commonplace in the cockpit of the future. Forward looking infrared (FLIR) thermal cameras have been developed to display a real-world visual image to the cockpit allowing the pilot to "see" in very low visibility conditions. Additionally, HUD systems are also being developed to display new synthetic vision system (SVS) images. In contrast to the EFVS, SVS produces a computer-generated artificial image using moving map and terrain databases to provide a more realistic view of the outside environment. Recently, display researchers have even combined enhanced flight vision system with SVS to improve thevisual picture. Combining the real work reliability of the enhanced flight vision system FUR with the ter­rain and situational awareness of SVS could dramatically reduce issues associated with low-visibility approaches in the future. ELECTRONIC FLIGHT BAGS (EFBs) In the near future, electronic flight bags (EFBs) will begin to show up with greater regularity on the flight deck. A number of avionics makers have already introduced such devices, which pilots would use to review charts and approach plates, perform weight and balance calculations, and plan flights, among other functions. Eventually, with the inclusion of chart databases that can be viewed on the MFD and EFBs, paper may vanish from the flight deck altogether. Of course, the transi­tion from a paper chart that the pilot can hold in his or her hands to electronic-only format will be slow for some operators, especially for airlines in developing world countries without the financial resources or technology to implement these changes. NEXT-GENERATION FLIGHT OPERATIONS In a NextGen environment, pilots would be released from the rigid discipline of being spaced in nose-to-tail time blocks, along less-than-optimum routes, and often at inef­ficient altitudes. Extended to its ultimate application, NextGen would embrace the airplane's complete operation, from start-up at the originating airport to shutdown at the destination after having flown a direct, nondeviating course, flying the optimal performance figures straight out of the airframe manufacturer's operating handbook. To make this new era possible, operators will need to install new avionics, the most critical being based upon ADS-B technology. The current Mode S transpon­ders will eventually take on a much more sophisticated role as ADS-B is imple­mented. Also required for NextGen will be datalink radios, which would be used to pass as much information as practical over discrete controller-pilot frequencies. Once the transition to a NextGen-based traffic regime begins, observers believe airlines will begin updating the current fleet fairly rapidly. The technological chal­lenges involved are large but not insurmountable, which means the future may be nearer than we realize. From a human factors point of view, major changes in NextGen flight decks also provide new opportunities for human error and signifi­cant training challenges. aviation safety report system EXAMPLES As more aircraft incorporate automated features into the flight deck, more and more reports are appearing in the Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) about the learning curve associated with new technology. The following two reports demonstrate the need for pilots to understand how advanced systems work in order for the systems to work as an airport information desk to pilots versus as a contributor to human error. In the first report, two pilots of an Embraer 190 jet experienced a track devia­tion when their Flight Management Computer (FMC) responded in an unantici­pated manner when there was a runway change. They neglected to verify inputs to the FMC for the new runway and should have put the autopilot in a different mode to keep it on the correct arrival route. However, due to a quirk in the navi­gation system, the plane went back to the beginning of the arrival procedure by default as result of the runway change. This process, according to the pilots, was counterintuitive and very illogical. Future training programs should catalogue the prevalence of such quirks and train pilots to watch for such unexpected situations. Another example involves a Boeing 737-800 flight crew missing an altitude constraint on the published flight plan before reaching the airport. air traffic control had cleared the plane to land on Runway 24R. The pilot changed the runway in the plane's automated system. At that time, the plane was on autopilot descending with the elevators controlling the pitch attitude of the aircraft to follow a programmed vertical path. However, after the new runway was inserted in the computer, the automation changed to have the elevators control the pitch attitude of the aircraft to control speed versus to follow the vertical path. Neither of the pilots noticed the switch from flying toward a vertical path to flying to a set speed since they were focused on the runway change. This was a lesson to both pilots that they need to monitor any changes to the modes being selected by the automation so that they always know how the aircraft is being flown. Remember the old adage: "Aviate, Navigate and Communicate" in that order. If all else fails, "Fly the aircraft." CONCLUSION It may seem obvious when you think about it, but commercial aviation safety is intimately connected to the design of the various aircraft that form the backbone of the transportation system. Over the past century, the industry has learned from many painful lessons and incorporated new knowledge into making aircraft both safer and more efficient. The jet age brought with it a significant increase in capabilities and reliability but also new challenges, such as structural fatigue and very long service life for aircraft. By leveraging knowledge from military jet programs, the manufacturers of commercial aircraft have been able to accelerate development of all the systems that make up the modern airliner, such as electronics, automation, structural resil­ience, and propulsion. Advancement has come via an evolutionary process, often prompted by painful accident investigation experience. Some principles developed over half a century ago, such as fail-safe design, have become fundamental to current and future designs. Other principles and regu­latory guidance for the design of aircraft for safety have stemmed from dramatic events, such a s when the fuselage ripped open on Aloha Airlines Flight 243 due to the uncontrolled propagation of a crack, and ultimately resulting in the passing of the Aging Aircraft Safety Act by the U.S. Congress. Different aircraft manufacturers can follow contrasting design philosophies, as evidenced in the approach toward automated flight envelope protections between Boeing and Airbus, where aircraft such as the A-320 use electronic lines of defense referred to as error-resistant or error-tolerant systems that prevent certain types of control inputs versus Boeing aircraft that present limit information but do not nec­essarily restrict pilot actions. Modern flight deck designs must be developed with NextGen airspace require­ments in mind, as illustrated by CDTI systems that allow pilots to self-resolve traffic conflicts and even plan their own spacing requirements in densely packed airspace. The pilots of the Embraer 190 and Boeing 737-800 featured in the aviation safety report system examples show the importance of designing new automated systems so that their operation is transparent and intuitive. Lastly, no matter how well we design aircraft, much of the safety value chain is formed by how well humans utilize the new technology. We have made extremely reliable and highly automated aircraft safety systems to the point where humans are unable to retain some basic skills associated with being a pilot. Figure 8-7 shows an increasingly rare sight on the modern flight decks of commercial airlin­ers. Hand-flying a jet is on the extinction list of common pilot duties. So it is fitting that this chapter mostly speaks about designing aircraft but finishes by discussing the human part of the design equation. KEY TERMS Aging Airplane Safety Rule (AASR) Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) AIRcraft Maintenance ANalysis (AIRMAN) Antiskid System automatic Slat Gapper Automation Surprise Central Maintenance Computer System (CMCS) Cockpit Display of Traffic Information (CDTI) Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC) Electronic Flight Bags (EFBs) Engine-Indicating and Crew-Alerting System (EICAS) Enhanced Airborne Flight Recorders (EAFRs) Enhanced Flight Vision System (EFVS) Extended-Range Twin-Engine Operations (ETOPS) Fail-Safe or Damage Tolerance Design Flight Data Recorder (FDR) Flight Management System (FMS) Flight Simulator Fly-by-Wire Forward Looking Infrared (FUR) Garbage in, Garbage out Ground-Proximity Warning System (GPWS) Head-Up Display (HUD) High Altitude Clear Air Turbulence (HI CAT) High-Lift Systems Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) Multifunction Displays (MFDs) Multiple-Site Damage (MSD) Primary Flight Display (PFD) Sterile Operation Stick-Shaker Synthetic Vision System (SVS) Thrust Reversers Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) very high frequency Datalink (VDL) Widespread Fatigue Damage (WFD) Wind Shear Wind-Tunnel Testing Wing Spoilers (Speed Brakes) REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. Discuss some of the early developments in jet engine technology that were included in the Boeing B-47 and Dash 80 aircraft. 2. What was the purpose of the pod-mounted engine installation? 3. What were some of the challenges to safety resulting from such radical air­frame designs as highly swept wings, high wing loading, increased speeds, and long-duration flights at high altitudes? 4. Describe some technological improvements in the following stopping systems: a. Antiskid system b. Fuse plugs in the wheels c. Wing spoilers d. Thrust reversers 5. What is meant by a fail-safe design? 6. List and discuss the parameters that define the age of an aircraft. 7. What are some of the technological advances that enhanced the flight handling characteristics of today's generation of aircraft? 8. Who are the three major participants in the structural safety process? Describe their roles. 9. What are some solutions to the problems of turbulence, winds, wind shear, ice and precipitation, and volcanic ash? 10. How do ice and precipitation affect airplane operations? Describe several technologies designed to address this problem. 11. List and briefly describe at least five flight deck technology changes that have significantly contributed to improving safety. 12. What are the basic purposes of GPWS, TCAS, and EICAS? 13. What are the basic functions of the flight management system (FMS)? 14 What is computational fluid dynamics (CFD)? 15. Discuss some of the technological advances in communications, navigation, and displays, including HUDs and EFBs. 16. Describe the functions of enhanced flight vision system and SVS.