CHAPTER SIX INTRODUCTION It can often be tedious to learn about the policy making side and the structure of organizations involved in creating regulations for aviation safety. However, it is of course an inherent component of understanding how the industry operates. As we saw in the last chapter, unfortunately many of the laws we have today are "written in blood," as they have emerged from the loss of life and not necessarily from proactively thinking about the flaws in the aviation safety system. In this chapter, we switch gears from discussing the bureaucracy of regulating safety to the investiga­tion of a breakdown in safety. Upon news of a crash, people immediately start mobilizing to prepare for the accident investigation. This includes deploying teams to the crash site, collecting data at the scene, and finally writing a report to share recommendations on how to prevent the accident from happening again. The contents of this chapter focus on the details associated with each phase of an investigation to provide a big-picture idea of what the process looks like. We wrap up the chapter with a case study of the Spanair Flight 5022 accident to show how everything we learned can be extended to real-life situations. As you will see, aviation accidents require very detailed and nuanced investiga­tions by hundreds of experts in order to determine not only the apparent causal factors but also the underlying conditions that helped the causal factors lead to the accident. These investigations help us craft recommendations for creating a safer aviation community. WHY INVESTIGATE? We investigate accidents to prevent future ones. The future accidents that are to be prevented do not necessarily have to look like the one that is being investigated. The major objective for investigating accidents is identifying hazards, and those hazards discovered need to be addressed through safety risk management, whether they actually were important to the accident in question or not, since they could create future accidents. Proactively finding, evaluating, and controlling safety-related hazards obvi­ously facilitate accident prevention. But what do safety professionals consider a hazard? A hazard is any internal or external condition, event, or circumstance that can cause injury or damage; a hazard affects humans and other system functionalities to cause failures. Figure 6-1 shows one of many different ways an accident scene may look like from the various hazards that exist today. Hazards must be identified, analyzed for risks, assessed, prioritized, and documented for decision­making purposes. Constantly going through this routine enables aviation safety professionals to determine the current safety status of an aviation organization. FIGURE 6-1 We must investigate all accidents to identify hazards that can jeopardize safety. (Source: NTSB) During an accident investigation, it is important to note that there is a sig­nificant difference between an engineering technical investigation and a human­performance investigation. Many accidents are the result of improper human performance. In the aviation system, the human element is the most flexible, adapt­able, and valuable component. Human-performance investigations help us attempt to explain how and why humans performed the way they did in a given circum­stance. As a result, we can formulate and revise regulations, rules, and training to help people perform better. In contrast, technical investigations provide engineering assessments and evalu­ations of the technical aspects of an accident sequence. It allows for establishing facts, drawing conclusions, and determining causes for how certain components performed. Technical investigations and human factors use difference resources when examining causes. Although they are different, their findings complement each other for painting the whole picture of why the accident happened. Often both types of investigations run simultaneously and even interface with each other, particularly when examining how humans interact with aircraft systems and com­ponents, such as flight deck automation. FINDINGS In accident investigations, findings are the factors that contributed significantly to the accident. An exact definition of findings seems to be slightly nebulous, as ICAO, FAA, and national transportation safety board do not clearly define them. Due to this, the International Society of Air Safety Investigators has recommended that international civil aviation organization define findings as "all significant conditions and events, causal and non-causal, found in an investigation." The U.S. Air Force does define findings, calling them the conclusions of the investigating body, which are "based on the weight of evidence, the investiga­tors' professional knowledge and their best judgment." As such, findings are statements of significant events or conditions leading to the accident. They are arranged in the order in which they occurred. Developing findings is a very useful way to account for the investigator's conclusions from an accident. It is important to note that findings are not necessarily causal factors in an accident. However, from the findings, the investigator can choose which items were actual causes. CAUSES A cause is a finding which singly or in combination with other causes, resulted in the damage or injury that occurred. A cause is also deficiency which if corrected, eliminated, or avoided, would likely have prevented or mitigated the damage or injuries associated with an accident or incident. Some investigators ask themselves three questions to test if a finding is indeed causal. This is often called the three-step causation test. If all three answers to the questions are "yes," then the finding likely helped cause the event. The three ques­tions are as follows: • Did the finding start or sustain the accident sequence? • If the finding had not existed, would the accident likely have been prevented? • If the finding is related to human performance, is it reasonable to expect that a human would have behaved otherwise? For example, imagine an accident where a commercial aircraft skids off the end of a runway during landing following a snowstorm, where the tower had relayed to the crew that the runway braking condition was good, as told to them by the airfield manager. During the investigation a finding is established that the airfield management failed to accurately report the braking condition of the run­way, given that the condition was actually poor rather than good. Is the finding a cause? Let us apply the three-question test: • Did the inaccurate report start or sustain the accident sequence? Yes. • If the report had not been inaccurate, would the accident likely have been prevented? Yes. Let us say that the deceleration performance analysis indicates so. • Is it reasonable to expect the correct reading of the braking condition? Yes. According to the three-question test, the finding is likely one of the causes of the accident. Continuing with our example, let us say that another finding was, "the pilots did not apply maximum braking to decelerate the aircraft during the landing because of an unknown valve problem in the anti-skid braking system." Is the finding one of the causes of the accident? Let us apply the three-question test: • Did not applying maximum braking start or sustain the accident sequence? Yes. • Would applying maximum braking have likely prevented the accident? Yes. Let us say that the deceleration performance analysis indicates so. • Is it reasonable to expect the pilots to have applied maximum braking in the situation? No. They could not have anticipated the failure in the braking system. Because the last test was negative, the findings are likely not one of the causes of the accident. At this point the reader may be confused. After all, the lack of maxi­mum braking certainly contributed to the accident. How can we say it was not a cause? The three-question test tells us that the finding is not causal, but yet we know the lack of sufficient braking was important. Usually this is an indication that the finding needs to be rewritten. A seasoned investigator facing this situation will dig deeper, searching to answer why the maxi­mum braking did not occur, then rewrite the finding, and then perform the test again. In the example, let us say that a technical analysis of the braking system was requested at the national transportation safety board laboratory, as shown in Figure 6-2. Continuing with our example, imagine that the laboratory report of the brak­ing system shows that a hydraulic fluid valve failed upon initial brake application during landing, and an investigation of the maintenance process shows that an inspection of the hydraulic valves in the braking system was documented but not actually accomplished 1 week before the accident. The investigator may now wisely decide to rewrite the original finding since numerous other factors have been uncovered. The investigator has established that insufficient braking was achieved as a result of low hydraulic pressure in the brake system due to a faulty valve. Furthermore, the investigator has uncovered that the faulty valve should have been caught during an inspection but was not, because of an improper shift change between aviation maintenance technicians performing the inspection since no procedure exists for performing the shift change. The investigator will probably decide to divide that very long finding into a series of smaller findings, and one of them may be, "no established procedure exists to ensure maintenance task completion during shift changes." Is the finding one of the causes of the accident? Let us apply the three-question test: • Did not having a procedure start or sustain the accident sequence? Yes. • Would having a proper procedure have likely prevented the accident? Yes. • Is it reasonable to expect that the maintenance organization of the airline should have such a procedure? Yes. Congratulations ! We have now determined another cause of the accident. Notice that removing either of the two stated causes would have prevented the accident. Furthermore, we have shown just how complex it can be to determine causes. A less sophisticated approach to accident investigation would have simply stated the case as, "the pilots didn't stop the aircraft before the end of the runway." But the reality is that the combination of the faulty braking action report and the mechanical issue with the brakes may have made stopping the aircraft in the avail­able runway nearly impossible. Furthermore, by rewriting the finding we have made it much easier to craft a recommendation that addresses the finding. Accident theory has evolved in sophistication through the years. For a long time there was a belief that a single cause produced any given accident. Such a monocausal approach to accident investigation was problematic because invariably there were some findings left over after the single cause was assigned that could also be classified as a cause. Other findings would have had to occur in order for the accident to unfold as it did. Referring back to our example of the aircraft skidding off the runway, we determined two causes, and there were probably more. If we only established the cause as one of the two, we would have only partially solved the puzzle. Eventually, safety professionals accepted the concept of multi-causality, whereby several causes are perceived as producing any given crash. It was not until 1994 that the national transportation safety board changed their format to begin listing multiple probable causes. Even then, some investigators clung to the belief that some causes were more important than others, labeling them as the primary, trigger, or main cause. Again, this was a problematic perspective because each cause, by definition, could have prevented the accident, and therefore removing it from the accident sequence could have prevented the event. Today, during the process of cause determination, we should keep the following items in mind: • There is not a single cause for an aircraft accident. Accidents are always multicausal. • All causes should be listed chronologically. Listing them in a different order can imply that some causes are more important than others. Once the causes have been established, investigators can use them to craft the recommendations. RECOMMENDATIONS The previous discussion of findings, some of which are causal, is very important. How we write up those causal findings is extremely critical. Why? Because recom­mendations are crafted to address those causal findings, so if we do not properly write those findings, we can damage the accuracy of the recommendation. Recommendations are the single most important takeaway from the accident investigation since the whole purpose of investigating the accident is to prevent future accidents. Investigators want to eliminate other accidents from happening with the same causes, and therefore, work diligently to identify the deficiencies that need correction. Recommendations are essentially suggestions about how to make air transportation safer. Generally, they are as nonspecific as possible to prove maximum flexibility for solving problems. One persistent problem that arises from creating recommendations is the chal­lenge of convincing regulators to implement change. Developing and putting new regulations into practice can be resource intensive. Doing so requires time, money, and careful planning; however, regulators seem to be most sensitive to the finan­cial costs of safety. There is sometimes difficulty in proving to regulators that they should invest in a safety measure that does not exist, even though it could greatly enhance safety for the aviation community; this is because regulators must them­selves justify any given expense as part of the many similar initiatives that are con­stantly under consideration for funding from a limited budget. INTERNATIONAL ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION OvERVIEW As introduced in Chapter 5, international civil aviation organization has played a major part in international avia­tion matters since its establishment in 1944. Commercial aviation safety has truly become a worldwide concern in the modern era of jet airline transportation, and the international civil aviation organization Chicago Convention provides for international cooperation in accident investigations in two documents: Article 26 of the Convention and in its Annex 1 3 entitled, Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation. This section sets forth ICAO's role in this process and explains how the aircraft accident investigation process is handled on a worldwide basis. Lcao's Role What if a commercial aircraft manufactured in the United States but flying for a European airline crashes in Argentina? Who should be responsible for investigat­ing the accident? The international process for aircraft accident investigation is set forth in Annex 1 3 of the Chicago Convention. This document provides the follow­ing principles: • The ultimate objective of accident investigation is prevention. • Responsibility for an investigation belongs to the member State in which the accident or incident occurred {State of Occurrence). • All international civil aviation organization States that may be involved must be promptly notified of the accident or incident occurrence. • Other member States may participate in an investigation based upon their rela­tionship to the accident, such as the State where: • The aircraft is registered. • The operator is based. • The aircraft was designed and manufactured. • States of Registry, Operator, Design, and Manufacture are entitled to appoint an accredited representative of that State to take part in the investigation. • Experts and advisors may also be appointed to assist accredited representatives. The international civil aviation organization member State conducting the investigation may call on the best tech­nical expertise available from any source to assist with the investigation. • The investigation process includes gathering, recording, and analysis of all rel­evant information; determination of the causes of the accident; formulating appropriate safety recommendations; and completion of the final report. REGIONAL AND NATIONAL AuTHORITIES The following are the primary international authorities empowered to investigate aircraft accidents in their state or region: • Australia-Australian Transport Safety Bureau • Canada-Transportation Safety Board of Canada (BST/TSB) • France-Bureau d'Enquetes et d' Analyses (BEA) pour Ia Securite de I' Aviation civil • Mexico-Secretariat of Communications and Transportation (SCT) • Russia (Commonwealth of Independent States, Former USSR area)-Interstate Aviation Committee (MAK) • United Kingdom-Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) of the U.K. Department for Transport • United States-National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) RECENT MAJOR INTERNATIONAL INVESTIGATION An example of a relatively recent and high-profile international investigation comes in the form of Air France Flight 447. On June 1, 2009, an Airbus A330-200 aircraft en route from Rio de Janeiro to Paris (Charles de Gaulle Airport) and operated as Air France Flight 447 crashed in the Atlantic Ocean causing 228 fatalities. This has been described as the worst accident in French aviation history by the BEA, the agency that investigated the accident under Annex 13 of the international civil aviation organization Convention. The national transportation safety board assigned an "accredited representative" to assist the BEA in this investigation. The outpouring of effort from the international community to investigate the Air France Flight 44 7 accidents shows how commercial aviation safety remains a top priority of international civil aviation organization and its member States. The 37th Assembly of international civil aviation organization strongly endorsed the sharing of safety information, and the United States offered its leadership and support by signing a precedent-setting agreement with ICAO, the European Union, and the International Air Transport Association (lATA) to facili­tate such sharing using modern Safety Management Systems (SMS) concepts. To showcase how accident investigations occur within a single nation state we will next feature the United States and explore the NTSB's organization and accident investigation process. NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), as pictured in action in Figure 6-3, is an independent agency of the U.S. government that determines the probable cause of transportation accidents and promotes transportation safety through the recommendation process. It is a relatively small agency of about 400 personnel who address multiple modes of transportation, not just aviation. The national transportation safety board also conducts safety studies, evaluates the effectiveness of transporta­tion safety programs of other government agencies, and reviews appeals of adverse actions by the federal aviation administration and U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) involving pilot and mariner certificates and licenses. To help prevent accidents, the national transportation safety board develops and issues safety recommen­dations to other government agencies, industry, and organizations that are in a posltlon to improve transportation safety. These recommendations are always based on the NTSB's investigations and studies and are the focal point of its efforts to improve safety in U.S. transportation systems. In 1967, Congress consolidated all transportation agencies into a new DOT and established the National Transportation Safety Board. With the passage of the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974, Congress made the national transportation safety board completely independent outside the DOT because "no Federal agency can properly perform such investigatory functions unless it is totally separate and independent from any other . agency of the United States." Since the DOT is charged with both the regulation and the promotion of transportation in the United States, and accidents may suggest deficiencies in the system, the NTSB's independence is necessary for objective oversight. national transportation safety board MissiON The national transportation safety board states its mission is to promote transportation safety by: • Maintaining its congressionally mandated independence and objectivity. • Conducting objective, precise accident investigations and safety studies. • Performing fair and objective airman and mariner certification appeals. • Advocating and promoting safety recommendations. • Assisting victims of transportation accidents and their families through Transportation Disaster Assistance (TDA) (www.ntsb.gov) In creating the NTSB, Congress envisioned that a single agency could develop a higher level of safety than the individual modal agencies working separately. In its major role, the NTSB's mission is to determine the probable cause of transportation accidents and to formulate safety recommendations to improve transportation safety. It is important to note that the national transportation safety board has no authority to regulate, fund, or be directly involved in the operation of any mode of transportation. Therefore, it has the ability to oversee the entire U.S. transportation system, conduct investigations, make recommendations from a totally objective viewpoint, and make recommen­dations for needed safety improvements. Its effectiveness depends on an ability to make timely and accurate determinations of the cause of accidents, along with comprehensive and well-considered safety recommendations. The most visible portion of the national transportation safety board involves major accident investigations. Under its accident selec­tion criteria, the NTSB's investigative response depends primarily on: • The need for independent investigative oversight to ensure public confidence in the transportation system. • The need to concentrate on the most significant and life-threatening safety issues. • The need to maintain a database so that trends can be identified and projected. The National Transportation Safety Board investigations include the participation of non governmental external parties, such as manufacturers, operators, and employee unions. Within the transportation network, each government organization has been established to fulfill a unique role. As the only federal agency whose sole purpose is promoting transportation safety, the national transportation safety board conducts detailed, open, and thorough accident investigations that often uncover sig­nificant system-wide problems that need to be corrected to prevent future similar accidents. Under the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974, the national transportation safety board investigates hun­dreds of accidents annually, including the following within the aviation mode of transportation: • All accidents involving 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Parts 121 and 135 a1r earners. • Accidents involving public (i.e., government) aircraft (except military accidents). • Foreign aircraft accidents involving U.S. airlines and/or U.S.-manufactured transport aircraft or major components. • Accidents involving air traffic control, training, midair collisions, newly certified aircraft/engines, and in-flight fire or breakup. • General aviation accidents, some of which are delegated to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for fact finding (it is important to note, however, that probable-cause determinations are never delegated) . • Certain drone accidents, as explained in the July 2016 national transportation safety board Advisory to Operators of Civil Unmanned Aircraft Systems in the United States. In addition, based on the agency's mandate under Annex 13 to the Chicago Convention and related international agreements, the national transportation safety board participates in some investigations of commercial aviation accidents throughout the world. The national transportation safety board enjoys a worldwide reputation. The major share of the NTSB's air safety rec­ommendations are directed to the FAA. These recommendations have resulted in a wide range of safety improvements in areas such as pilot training, aircraft maintenance and design, air traffic control procedures, and survival equipment requirements. The national transportation safety board is also empowered to conduct special studies of transportation problems. A special study allows the national transportation safety board to break away from the mold of the single accident investigation to examine a safety problem from a broader perspec­tive. In the past, for example, the national transportation safety board has conducted special studies on weather, how well aircraft withstand impact forces (crashworthiness), in-flight collisions, and commuter airlines. As of 2015 , the national transportation safety board has investigated over 140,000 aviation incidents and several thousand surface transportation incidents. Since its establishment, national transportation safety board has issued more than 14,000 safety recommendations to more than 2,500 recipients. national transportation safety board ORGANIZATION As provided on its Web site, there are three levels to the national transportation safety board organization chart, which is provided in Figure 6-4. For the latest information, please visit www.ntsb.gov. The top organizational layer consists of the five board members, each nomi­nated by the U.S. President and confirmed by the Senate to serve 5-year terms. A Chairman and a Vice Chairman are designated from these five board mem­bers. national transportation safety board board members establish policy on transportation safety issues and on national transportation safety board goals, objectives, and operations. Board members review and approve major accident reports and safety recommendations, and decide appeals of federal aviation administration certificate actions. Individual national transportation safety board board members often serve as spokesman for major accident investigation as part of Go Teams, preside over public hearings, make major speeches, and testify before Congressional Committees. OFFICE OF AVIATION SAFETY The Office of Aviation Safety has the responsibility for investigating aviation acci­dents and incidents and for proposing probable causes for the Board's approval. With only a modest sized staff the office handles more than 1 ,700 aviation acci­dents and incidents annually. The office also works, in conjunction with the other offices, to formulate recommendations to prevent the recurrence of similar acci­dents and incidents and to improve aviation safety as a whole. Most of the field investigations are led by a regional investigator from one of the four offices: • Eastern Region• Central Region • Western Pacific Region • Alaska Region OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW jUDGES By necessity, much of the NTSB's work deals with the inanimate, such as aircraft structures, railroad tracks, pipelines, operating rules and procedures, and so forth. However, there is one unit of the NTSB, the Office of Administrative Law Judges, which most often deals directly with the individual. The role of the Office of the Administrative Law Judge is to act as an initial appeals court for persons who might have had licenses or certificates suspended, revoked, or modified by the federal aviation administration or the DOT. The license holders range from pilots and aircraft mechanics to merchant seamen and flight dispatchers. But the authority of the law judge also extends beyond the individual to include the hearing appeals that might involve the loss or suspension of operating certificates issued for individual aircraft models or to airlines. The law judges function as trial judges, administering oaths, receiving evidence, ruling on motions, issuing subpoenas, and regulating the course of the hearing. For example, Figure 6-5 shows Chief Administrative Law Judge Alfonso Montano swearing in Christopher A. Hart as the 13th Chairman of the NTSB. Many hearings are held outside the Washington, D.C., area. The law judge's initial decisions and orders are appealable to the full NTSB. Either party to the proceeding, the airman or the FAA, may appeal the judge's deci­sion to the NTSB. When a petition for reconsideration is not filed, then the NTSB's order becomes final if not appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals. Only the airman or seaman can take an appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals. The federal aviation administration and the U.S. Coast Guard, in the case of seamen, do not have the right of appeal to the court as government agencies. On review, the court has the power to affirm, modify, or set aside the full NTSB's opinion and order, in whole or in part, and if needed, further proceedings by the NTSB. AcciDENT INVESTIGATION PROCESS When a major commercial aviation accident occurs, an national transportation safety board go-team, led by an investigator-in-charge (IIC), is dispatched from the agency's Washington, D.C., headquarters to the accident site, usually within a couple of hours of notification of the event. The IIC, a senior air safety investigator with the NTSB's Office of Aviation Safety (OAS), organizes, conducts, and manages the field phase of the investigation, regardless of whether a board member is also present on the scene. The IIC will oversee all facets of the investigation to include assessing the factual circumstances of the crash (on site and afterward), preparing final reports for submission to the board members, initiating safety recommendations to prevent future accidents, and participating in foreign accident investigations. The IIC has the responsibility and authority to supervise and coordinate all resources and activities of the field investigators. The national transportation safety board go-team may form as many as 10 investigative groups. Specialist "working group" teams may be formed around subject matter areas, such as power plants, systems, structures, operations, air traffic control, human factors, weather, and survivability. Groups associated with the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR), pictured in Figure 6-6, are formed at the national transportation safety board laboratory in Washington. All national transportation safety board staff assigned to a particular investigation are under the direction of the IIC. PARTY PROCESS Increasingly, the national transportation safety board has no choice but to conduct its investigations in the glare of intense media attention and public scrutiny. As commercial air travel has become routine for millions of passengers, major accidents have come to be viewed by some as nothing short of national catastrophes. At the same time, an national transportation safety board statement of cause may be nothing short of catastrophic for the airline, aircraft manu­facturer, or other entity that may be deemed responsible for an accident. A very real, albeit unintended, consequence of the NTSB's safety investiga­tion is the assignment of fault or blame for the accident by both the courts and the media. Hundreds of millions of dollars in liability payments, as well as the interna­tional competitiveness of some of the most influential U.S. corporations, rest on the NTSB's conclusions about the cause of a major accident. This was not the system that was intended by those who supported the creation of an independent investi­gative authority, but it is the environment in which the investigative work of the agency is performed today. Given the amazing complexities of accidents and the impossibility of having in­house experts on every component and system of modern aircraft, the national transportation safety board relies on teamwork to resolve accidents, naming "parties" to participate in the investiga­tion that include manufacturers, operators, and, by law, the FAA. The so-called party system enables the national transportation safety board to leverage its limited resources and personnel by bringing into an investigation the technical expertise of the companies, operator employee organizations (such as unions), and individuals who were involved in the accident or who might be able to provide specialized knowledge to assist in deter­mining the probable cause. Except for the FAA, party status is a privilege, not a right, and party members are occasionally kicked out of investigations for not following the protocols inher­ent in the party system. The IIC has the discretion to designate the parties that are allowed to participate in an investigation, and each party representative must work under the direction of the IIC or senior national transportation safety board investigators at all times. No members of the news media, lawyers, or insurance personnel are permitted to participate in any phase of the investigation. Claimants or litigants (victims or family members) are also specifically prohibited from serving as party members. The specialists that any party assigns to an investigation must be employees of the party and must possess expertise to assist the national transportation safety board in its investiga­tion. Providing the safety board with technical assistance gives parties many opportunities to learn what happened and to formulate theories as to the cause of the accident. Party representatives are not permitted to relay information to corpo­rate headquarters without the consent of the IIC, and then only when necessary for accident prevention purposes. Information is not to be used for litigation prepara­tion or for public relations. The first 2 days following an accident are critical because the evidence is fresh and undisturbed. After people start going through the wreckage, the clues begin to disappear. An airspeed indicator's needle might be moved, a fuel line might drain, ice on a wing could melt, or leaked hydraulic fluid could sink into the ground. Subtle clues are lost that could reveal possible factors in the accident. Consequently, crash sites are protected from the untrained until the go-team arrives on the scene. THE Go-TEAM On 24-hour alert, go-team personnel possess a wide range of accident investiga­tion skills. For aviation accidents, a go-team roster could include one of the five members of the NTSB, an air traffic control specialist, a meteorologist, a human­performance expert, an expert trained in witness interrogation, an engine special­ist, as well as experts in hydraulics, electrical systems, and maintenance records. Some go-team members are completely intermodal in that their area of expertise is applicable to each mode, meaning that they may help investigate rail accidents one day and maritime accidents another day. For example, an national transportation safety board wiring expert can apply expertise in that area to any transportation accident involving wiring and may thus be considered intermodal. Human-factors experts fall into this category, as do the NTSB's metallurgists, meteorologists, and hazardous materials experts. Figure 6-7 shows the moment when team members arrive at the airport nearest an accident to perform the investigation. Go-team duty is rotated. Immediately after one team has been dispatched, a new list is posted. Like firefighters, go-team members spend many hours doing office work and working on special studies until the inevitable call comes. The federal aviation administration usually gets the first word of an accident, followed by the director of the NTSB's regional or field office. This office notifies the go-team, the board members on duty, the national transportation safety board chair, and the public affairs division. The team is normally on its way within 2 hours. Until it arrives, an investigator from the nearest national transportation safety board field office secures the crash site with the help of local authorities. Representatives from the aircraft manufacturer, the airline, the engine manufacturer, and the federal aviation administration also arrive. If the accident is major, a Board member of theNTSB accompanies the team. ACCIDENT SITE The length of time a go-team remains on the accident site varies with need, but generally a team completes its work in 10 to 14 days. Accident investigations often require off-site engineering studies or laboratory tests that might extend the fact­finding stage. In cases of crew fatalities, a local coroner usually performs autopsies on the flight crew to determine at the outset whether pilot incapacitation might have been a factor. An autopsy can also reveal who was sitting where in the cockpit and who was flying the aircraft, among many other factors. Figure 6-8 shows the appearance of a relatively contained accident site where an aircraft continuing airworthines management exposition to rest after overrunning a runway. After the preliminary steps are completed, the detailed work begins. The go­team is organized into groups of experts, each of which focuses on specific aspects of the investigation. Each group, headed by a group chairperson, concentrates on a specific portion of the investigation. Coordination is orchestrated to ensure inves­tigative coverage in areas where more than one group may have a responsibility. Using their combined knowledge of flying in general and of this aircraft in particu­lar, the investigators work within groups and across groups to compare what they know with what they find in the wreckage. Cameras are an important tool of the trade. Before the team members touch any of the wreckage, they take pictures from various angles and distances and make notes into voice recorders for subsequent reference during analyses. Operational factors experts in the disciplines of air traffic control (ATC), operations, and weather support major investigations with intensive work in their specialties. The air traffic control specialists examine navigation and communication facilities, procedures, and flight handling, including ground-to-air voice transmissions, and develop flight histories from Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and ter­minal facility radar records. Other specialists examine factors involved in the flight operations of the carrier and the airport and in the flight training and experience of the flight crew. Weather specialists examine meteorological and environmental conditions that may have contributed to the accident. Human-performance specialists examine the background and performance of persons associated with the circumstances surrounding an accident, including the person's knowledge, experience, training, physical abilities, decisions, actions, rela­tionships, equipment design, ergonomics, and the work environment. Aviation engineering experts from four areas provide strong technical investi­gative skills. Power-plant specialists examine the airworthiness of aircraft engines, while structures experts examine the integrity of aircraft structures and flight controls as well as the adequacy of design and certification. Systems specialists examine the airworthiness of aircraft flight controls and avionic, electrical, and hydraulic systems. Maintenance specialists also examine the service history and maintenance of aircraft systems, structures, and power plants. Survival factors experts investigate what affected the survival of persons involved in accidents, including the causes of injuries and fatalities. These investiga­tors also examine cabin safety and emergency procedures, crashworthiness, equipment design, emergency responsiveness, and airport certification. LABORATORY While the investigators work on site, the NTSB's materials laboratory in Washington, D.C., performs detailed analyses on items found at the site. One of the finest of its kind in the world, this national transportation safety board laboratory is designed to support inves­tigators in the field. For example, the laboratory has the capability to "read out" CVRs and decipher FDRs. CVRs allow investigators to listen to sounds recorded on the flight deck, such as power changes, alarms, and verbal communication. FDRs provide investigators with such key factors as airspeed, altitude, vertical acceleration, and elapsed time. These two so-called black boxes provide investiga­tors with a profile of an aircraft during the crucial last minutes of flight. Metallurgy is another of the laboratory's critical skills. national transportation safety board metallurgists perform post-accident analysis of wreckage parts. The laboratory is capable of determining whether failures resulted from inadequate design strength, excessive loading, or deterioration in static strength through fatigue or corrosion. Figure 6-9 shows an national transportation safety board investigator methodically scrutinizing the condition of a part from the wreckage of an aircraft. The investigation of the American Airlines DC-10 that lost its left engine after takeoff from Chicago's O'Hare Airport in May 1979 probably could not have been concluded without the help of the materials lab. Preliminary investigations led met­allurgists to focus on the aft bulkhead of the left engine pylon, the vertical member of the wing from which the engine is suspended. They found the overstressed area where the engine broke off. As suspected, a trail of fatigue marks was found leading up to the overstressed area. But the real mystery turned up when the metallur­gists followed the fatigue marks to their point of origin, only to discover another overstressed area, and nothing else. The first overstress had caused the fatigue, and the fatigue had caused the final break. But what had caused the initial overstress? The metallurgists and specialists reviewed the aircraft's maintenance records and found that when removing the engines, a maintenance crew had used a forklift to help lower the entire engine-pylon assembly. Although the crew did not realize it at the time, the method was causing hidden damage at the points where the engine and pylon were fastened to the wing. As a result of these findings, the engine removal procedure was changed for future generations. AcciDENT REPORT PREPARATION Following completion of the on-scene phase of the investigation (which may last for several days or weeks), each national transportation safety board group chair (the senior investigator over­seeing a specific area of the investigation) completes a factual report on his or her area of responsibility. The reports are likely to include proposed safety recom­mendations to correct deficiencies and prevent future similar accidents. All factual material is placed in the public docket that is open and available for public review. Thereafter, the investigators involved in the case begin an often lengthy period of further fact gathering, usually involving one or more public hearings, and final analysis of the factual information collected. There is no time limit on national transportation safety board investigative activity. Safety board procedures have a target date for completion of the final accident report within 1 year of the date of the accident, but commercial aviation investigations have taken as little as 4 months for relatively simple but serious incidents and as much as 4 years for com­plex accidents. A key milestone in the report process is the group chairs' preparation of ana­lytical reports in their respective areas of expertise. The parties may contribute to the analytical reports through their continued contact with the national transportation safety board group chairs and the IIC, but parties are not allowed to review, edit, or comment on the analyti­cal reports themselves. The parties also contribute to the safety board's analytical process through written submissions, which are sometimes extensive and become part of the public docket. Public HEARING Following an accident, the national transportation safety board may decide to hold a public hearing to collect added information and to discuss at a public forum the issues involved in an acci­dent. Every effort is made to hold the hearing promptly. A hearing involves national transportation safety board investigators, other parties to the investigation, and expert witnesses called to testify. At each hearing, a Board of Inquiry is established that is made up of senior safety board staff, chaired by the presiding national transportation safety board mem­ber. The Board of Inquiry is assisted by a technical panel. Some of the national transportation safety board inves­tigators who have participated in the investigation serve on the technical panel. Depending on the topics to be addressed at the hearing, the panel often includes specialists in the areas of aircraft performance, power plants, systems, structures, operations, air traffic control, weather, survival factors, and human factors. Those involved in reading out the cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder, and in reviewing witness and maintenance records, also might participate in the hearing. Expert witnesses are called to testify under oath about selected topics to assist the safety board in its investigation. The testimony is intended to expand the public record and to demonstrate to the public that a complete, open, and objective inves­tigation is being conducted. The witnesses who are called to testify are selected because of their ability to provide the best available information on the issues related to the accident. Following the hearing, investigators will gather additional needed information and conduct further tests identified as necessary during the hearing. After the inves­tigation is complete and all parties have had an opportunity to review the factual record, a technical review meeting of all parties is convened. That meeting is held to ensure no errors exist in the investigation and to determine if everything neces­sary has been accomplished FINAL AcciDENT REPORT PREPARATIO With the completion of the fact-finding phase, the accident investigation process enters its final stage-analysis of the factual findings. The analysis is conducted at the NTSB's Washington, D.C., headquarters. The final accident report includes a list of factual findings concerning the accident, analysis of those findings, recom­mendations to prevent a repetition of the accident, and a probable-cause statement. The IIC and the national transportation safety board senior staff create a final draft report, called the nota­tion draft, for presentation to the board members. This draft includes safety recom­mendations and a finding of probable causes. Following a period for review of the draft report, a public meeting of the board members is held in Washington, D.C. The national transportation safety board staff will present and comment on the draft report; party representatives are permitted to attend but may not make any kind of presentation or comment. At this meeting, the board members may vote to adopt this draft, in its entirety, as the final accident report; may require further investigation or revisions; or may adopt the final accident report with changes that are discussed during the meeting. Safety recommendations resulting from major investigations generally are included in the final accident report; however, in the interest of safety, they may be issued at any time during the course of an investigation if the national transportation safety board deems it necessary. SAFETY RECOMMENDATIONS The safety recommendations made to the federal aviation administration are the NTSB's end product. Nothing takes a higher priority, and nothing is more carefully evaluated. In effect, the recommendation is vital to the NTSB's basic role of accident preven­tion because it is the lever used to bring changes and improvements in safety to the nation's transportation system. According to the FAA, the national transportation safety board and the federal aviation administration agree on a course of action about 88 % of the time. With human lives involved, timeliness also is an essential part of the recommendation process. As a result, the national transportation safety board issues a safety recommendation as soon as a problem is identified without necessarily waiting until an investigation is completed and the probable cause of an accident determined. In its mandate to the NTSB, Congress clearly emphasized the importance of safety recommendations, saying the national transportation safety board shall "advocate meaning­ful responses to reduce the likelihood of recurrence of transportation accidents." Each recommendation issued by the national transportation safety board designates the person, or the party, expected to take action, describes the action that the national transportation safety board expects, and clearly states the safety need to be satisfied. Recommendations are based on findings of the investigation and may address deficiencies that do not pertain directly to what is ultimately determined to be the cause of the accident. For example, in the course of its investigation of the crash landing of a DC-10 in Sioux City, Iowa, in 1989, the national transportation safety board issued recommenda­tions on four separate occasions before issuing its final report. In the TWA Flight 800 investigation in 1996, once it was determined that an explosion in the center fuel tank caused the breakup of the aircraft, the national transportation safety board issued urgent safety recom­mendations aimed at eliminating explosive fuel/air vapors in airliner fuel tanks. Occasionally, a single crash investigation can have major ramifications on the entire commercial aviation industry. Such was the case of Colgan Air Flight 3407, a commuter airline accident which occurred on February 12, 2009 near Buffalo, New York. Figure 6-10 shows the appearance of the wreckage from Flight 3407. From an national transportation safety board point of view, this accident investigation was extraordinary in its sweeping scope, number of recommendations, and speed of delivery to the public. The issues presented and explored during the public hearing and investigation were the following: • Effect of icing on aircraft performance • Cold weather operations • The "sterile cockpit" (inappropriate discussions between the pilots) • Flight crew experience and training • Human fatigue management • Stall recovery The final national transportation safety board report was issued with unprecedented speed, less than 1 year after the accident, and the Board made 28 safety recommendations which covered FIGURE 6-10 The wreckage of Colgan Flight 3407. (Source: NTSB) a wide range of safety issues that were factors in this accident, especially pilot training and fatigue. This single accident has had a profound effect on commercial aviation safety today. INVESTIGATING A GENERAL-AVIATION ACCIDENT The investigation of general-aviation accidents, often involving light recreational aircraft, is a simpler process requiring fewer staff members per accident. Inasmuch as the national transportation safety board investigates many general aviation accidents per year, abbreviated investigations are generally necessary, given the agency's limited staff and budget­ary resources. Most general-aviation accident investigations are conducted by one of the NTSB's regional or field offices. In a field investigation, at least one investi­gator goes to the crash site; a limited investigation is carried out by correspondence or telephone. Some, but by no means all, general aviation accidents generate safety recommendations approved by the national transportation safety board members. FAMILY ASSISTANCE AND THE TRANSPORTATION DISASTER ASSISTANCE DIVISION Following the enactment of the Aviation Disaster Family Assistance Act of 1 996, the President designated the national transportation safety board as the lead federal agency for the coordination of federal government assets at the scene of a major aviation accident and as the liaison between the airline and the families. The role of the national transportation safety board includes integrat­ing the resources of the federal government and other organizations to support the efforts of state and local governments and the airlines to airport information desk aviation disaster victims and their families. The NTSB's Transportation Disaster Assistance Division assists in making federal resources available to local authorities and the airlines, for example, to airport information desk in rescue and salvage operations and to coordinate the provision of family counseling, victim identification, and forensic services. The safety board has sought to maintain a distinct separation between family assistance activities and the NTSB's technical investigative staff. federal aviation administration Responsmilities During AN Investigation Accident investigation is also the responsibility of each federal aviation administration Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), which maintains a pre-accident plan that is tailored to that office's specific requirements, such as the geographic location, climate, staffing, and resources. For example, the logistical requirements to investigate an accident in Alaska may require snowmobiles and cold weather clothing, whereas a pre­accident plan for investigations in Florida may require airboats and scuba diving expertise. The federal aviation administration works very closely with the NTSB, ensuring that: • All facts and circumstances leading to the accident are recorded and evaluated. • Actions are taken to prevent similar accidents in the future. Determining whether: • Performance of federal aviation administration facilities or functions was a factor. • Performance of non-FAA owned and operated air traffic control (ATC) facilities or a navigational airport information desk was a factor. • Airworthiness of FAA-certified aircraft was a factor. • Competency of FAA-certified airmen, air agencies, commercial operators, or air carriers was involved. • Federal Aviation Regulations were adequate. • Airport certification safety standards or operations were involved. • Airport security standards or operations were involved. • Airman medical qualifications were involved. • There was a violation of Federal Aviation Regulations. The federal aviation administration conducts investigations and submits factual reports of the investiga­tions to the national transportation safety board on accidents delegated to the federal aviation administration by the NTSB. The FAA's prin­cipal investigator at an accident is also called the investigator-in-charge (IIC). This individual directs and controls all federal aviation administration participation in the accident until the inves­tigation is complete. Included is the authority to procure and use the services of all needed federal aviation administration personnel, facilities, equipment, and records. The federal aviation administration IIC (not to be confused with the national transportation safety board IIC) is under the control and direction of the national transportation safety board IIC in an NTSB-conducted investigation. When accident investigations are delegated to the federal aviation administration by the NTSB, the federal aviation administration IIC becomes an authorized representative of the NTSB. All the investigative authority prescribed in the applicable national transportation safety board regula­tions falls to this person. All other federal aviation administration personnel involved in such an investigation report to the IIC and are responsible to that person for all reports they have pre­pared or received during the investigation national transportation safety board ACCIDENT DATABASES AND SYNOPSES he national transportation safety board aviation accident database contains information dating from 1962 about civil aviation accidents and selected incidents within the United States, its territories and possessions, and in international waters. Generally, a prelimi­nary report is available online within a few days of an accident. Factual infor­mation is added when available, and when the investigation is completed, the preliminary report is replaced with a final description of the accident and its probable cause. Full narrative descriptions may not be available for dates before 1 993, cases under revision, or where national transportation safety board did not have primary investigative responsibility. national transportation safety board MOST WANTED AVIATION SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS Since the national transportation safety board lacks regulatory authority over the federal aviation administration and aviation industry, one of its most important functions is to strongly recommend and advocate appropri­ate federal aviation administration actions that will improve aviation safety. The Board satisfies this mandate by publishing and frequently updating its "Most Wanted List" of safety improvements for all modes of transportation covered by the NTSB, although the aviation improvements are the ones of interest to readers of this book. The most current national transportation safety board Most Wanted List can be found on the national transportation safety board Web site. Following are the elements contained in the latest national transportation safety board Most Wanted List that impact commercial aviation, as provided by the national transportation safety board Web site. The reader is encouraged to check the most current national transportation safety board Web site for updates and emerging information on the latest safety issues. national transportation safety board MosT WANTED LisT FOR 2017-2018 REDUCE FATIGUE-RELATED AcciDENTS Human fatigue affects the safety of the traveling public, regardless of the mode of transportation. When people are not awake and alert, they cannot perform at their best, thus endangering themselves and others. To make matters worse, fatigue actually impairs our ability to judge just how fatigued we really are. Preventing fatigue requires a comprehensive approach that combines the following items: research, education and training, technologies, treatment of sleep disorders, hours-of-service regulations, and on- and off-duty scheduling poli­cies and practices. STRENGTHEN OccuPANT ProTEcTioN Sadly, there have been many accidents where improved occupant protection systems could have reduced injuries and even saved lives. For example, in the 2013 San Francisco Asiana Flight 214, two of the three fatalities were the result of passengers not wearing their seatbelts. Additionally, the Federal Aviation Administration exempts children under age 2 from wearing a seatbelt, allowing them to travel unrestrained on an adult's lap. Necessary improvements include the increased use of existing restraint systems and better design and implementation of occupant protection systems that preserves survivable space and ensures ease of evacuation. Expand Use Of Recorders To Enhance Transportation Safety Investigators need to have an accurate insight into how accident sequences unfolded in order to prevent future, similar events. Cockpit voice and data recorders have been a critical tool in helping to achieve this goal. However, some questions could only have been answered through the data provided from an image (video) recorder. Image recordings can help to fill gaps by providing investigators and operators first­hand knowledge of crew activities. To address these problems, regulations should require the use of cockpit voice and image recorders, but until that time, operators should proactively procure this technology to improve their operational and safety oversight REQUIRE MEDICAL FITNEss. When pilots have untreated or undiagnosed medical condi­tions that prevent them from doing their job safety, people can be seriously injured or die. Requiring medical fitness for duty can prevent accidents that can lead to other tragic outcomes. For example, the national transportation safety board has found that obstructive sleep apnea has been a factor in multiple accidents, as aviation lacks a complete screening process for this condition. The national transportation safety board has made recommendations for a com­prehensive medical certification system that will ensure fitness for duty before the operation of a plane. Eliminate Distractions. For over 10 years, the national transportation safety board has recognized that personal electronic devices are a cause or contributing factor to accidents. People have a limited attention span, so each auxiliary task impairs our processing of the pri­mary task. Focusing on any other task than what is ahead can impair performance and lead to deadly consequences. Although commercial airlines recognize the need for a " sterile cockpit," meaning pilots should refrain from nonessential activi­ties and conversation during critical phases of flight, other aviation professionals could make good use of the philosophy during their work in support of flight operations. End Alcohol And Other Drug Impairment In Transportation. Impaired judgment can be the result of both prescribed and over-the-counter medicines. Complex machin­ery like aircraft require operators, aviation maintenance technicians, air traffic controllers, and support personnel to perform at their best. According to a 2014 Safety Study by the national transportation safety board that focused on drug use trends in aviation, the presence of potentially impairing drugs in pilots increased from 11 % during 1990-1997 to 23 % during 2008-2012. In the same time periods, positive marijuana results increased from 1 . 6 % to 3 . 0 % . However, the most commonly found impairing substance in fatal crashes was diphenhydramine, a sedating antihistamine found in over-the-counter medications. More and better data will help us understand the scope of the problem and the effectiveness of countermeasures. This will help spread good information for operators to make an informed decision about the effects of different drugs or taking medication. Additionally, pilots should consult with their doctor before taking a medication and discuss the impairing effect of any medical condition as it might increase their risk of having an accident. ENSURE THE SAFE SHIPMENT oF HAZARDous MATERIALS Although this topic has been a perennial hazard in aviation, public awareness of the problem skyrocketed in 1 996 following the 1 10 fatalities from the crash of ValuJet Flight 592, which was a McDonnell Douglas DC-9, into the Everglades 1 1 minutes after departing from Miami. Investigation revealed a series of factors, with one of them being improp­erly secured cargo of over 100 expired chemical oxygen generators that resulted in a fire in the cargo compartment. Fast forward 20 years, and the new featured hazard is the lightweight, high-energy density lithium batteries, including lithium­ion batteries, which are commonly used to power portable electronic devices (PEDs). The reader must realize that most passengers onboard a commercialaircraft today probably have such a battery in their possession. Some power arrangements in PEDs are more risky than others. In October 201 6, the federal aviation administration banned traveling by air with the Samsung Galaxy Note 7 due to the risk the phone poses for onboard fires. PEDs are only one type of onboard hazard among a range of potential hazards that may include power tools, other household products in the passenger cabin, and inappropriately labeled and screened shipments in cargo compartments. CASE STUDY: SPANAIR FLIGHT 5022 ACCIDENT Throughout this chapter, we have discussed how investigations require a large number of specialists to collaborate and what their responsibilities look like when a crash happens. There are many people involved, all simultaneously working on different pieces of the puzzle. To illustrate how this process works in the real world, we will examine the 2008 crash of a McDonnell Douglas MD-82 operating as Spanair Flight 5022 that killed 154 people. The accident aircraft was being operated on a scheduled Spanish flight from Madrid to Gran Canaria Airport when it crashed on August 20, 2008. Prior to takeoff, the pilots had failed to deploy the required flaps and slats of the plane. These devices help a plane create lift, which allows the plane to fly at the slow speeds associated with takeoff and landing. Without them deployed, the plane could not generate enough lift to keep the aircraft airborne, and thus it impacted the terrain immediately after takeoff. The flight was a Star Alliance codeshare, meaning that it carried passengers booked by multiple airlines, and was operating on behalf of Lufthansa. Figure 61 1 shows the recovery effort for a fuselage section from the wreckage in Madrid. FIGURE 6-11 A fuselage section of Spanair Flight 5022. (Source: Comisi6n de Investigaci6n de Accidentes e Incidentes de Aviacion Civil, CIAIAC) BACKGROUND Spanair was a Spanish airline that began operations in March 1988. Originally, it was a joint venture between Scandinavian Airlines and Viajes Marsans set up to conduct European charters. In 1991, it grew to include long-haul flights to the United States, Mexico, and the Dominican Republic, and in 1994, launched domes­tic service within Spain. Spanair's fleet consisted mostly of planes in the McDonnell Douglas MD-80/90 series. The accident aircraft belonged to this category, as it was an MD-82. The model is a variant of the MD-80, which is a twin-engine, short-to­medium haul commercial jet airliner. The MD-82 has a takeoff warning system with an audible warning for the pilots, which warns if the aircraft has improper takeoff configuration when the takeoff is initiated. This feature is important to keep in mind as we explore the Spanair 5022 accident. The system is supposed to act as a cross-check for pilots who may have forgotten to complete some of the steps on the pre-departure checklist. However, the failure of the takeoff warning system itself to alert of a discrepancy is not uncommon in the MD-80 series and has been associated with other fatal accidents, including Northwest Flight 255 at Detroit in 1987. In any accident, investigators complete rigorous profile sketches of the people involved to understand what was going on in their life and to see if it could have affected their ability to do their job. The backgrounds of the pilots flying Spanair Flight 5022 were therefore examined. Prior to and during the flight, the crew seemed to be fit for duty. The Captain's credentials were in good standing and he had previously severed as a captain and test pilot in the Spanish Air Force. He had been with the airline for 9 years. His file reflected that he was an above aver­age pilot although he could improve his crew resource management skills. He had been described as disciplined, precise, and meticulous in his job, and someone who would adhere to procedures rigorously. He had reportedly been in good spirits prior to the flight. The other pilot, who was the First Officer, was 31 and hired in February 2007. At the time of the accident, Spanair was experiencing employee layoffs which would have affected the First Officer. He had planned to find another job and keep flying. However, colleagues had described him a serious and disciplined pilot who made an effort to collaborate. He seemed to love flying and be happy to do so. It is also important for investigators to create a timeline of the flight because it helps understand how the pilots interacted with the plane and the plane's responses to pilot input. Looking at the sequence of events for Spanair 5022 helps paint a picture of what was going on in the cockpit and with the plane. 13:24:57 After the pilots had been cleared for takeoff, they cancelled the departure when they noticed that there was an abnormal reading in one of the external probes of the aircraft that was used to generate data for cockpit instruments. 13:42:50 Two maintenance personnel reported to the aircraft to check on the issue. Maintenance did detect something wrong. 13:54:02 The minimum equipment list commonly referenced by pilots and maintenance personnel stated that the airplane could be dispatched for flight with the probe heating inoperative as icing conditions were not forecasted for the flight. The Maintenance Technician proposed that the pilots pull breaker Z-29 to disconnect the electrical supply to the probe heater. The plane was then released for departure. 14:08:43 The Crew accomplished the "Prestart" and "Before Start" checklists. The Captain anticipated some of the items on the "Before Start" checklist before they were read by the First Officer. 14: 12:08 Once the engines were started, the "After Start" checklist was performed. However, the item on the checklist to check the flaps/slats was skipped, and the Captain asked the First Officer to request permission from air traffic control to start taxing to the runway for takeoff. 14:15:56 The Crew accomplished the "Taxi" checklist. 14:22:06 The First Officer accomplished the "Takeoff Imminent" checklist. 14:23:14 Spanair Flight 5022 confirmed clearance for takeoff. 13:54:02 The Crew commented that the auto-throttle was not working and they would have to do a manual takeoff. 14:24:10 Throughout the takeoff and until the end of the cockpit voice recorder, no sounds were recorded emanating from the takeoff warning systems. 14:24:14 The plane alerted the Crew that there was an aerodynamic stall. The First Officer thought this may be engine failure, and the Captain asked how to turn off the warning. At this time, the pitch angle was 15.5° and the bank angle 4.4°. The bank angle increased to a maximum of 20°. From that moment on, there was a warning coming from the Enhanced Ground Proximity Warning System for the bank angle as well as the alternating horn and voice stall warning. 14:24:24 Sounds corresponding to the initial impact with the ground. 14:24:36 The flight data recorder finished recording. INVESTIGATION Investigators are trained to avoid distractions from so-called red herrings, which is an expression referring to information that appears significant but actually is not and which draws attention away from the issue at hand. Similarly, investigators are taught to control the human tendency to speculate, particularly in the absence of concrete evidence, and which is common in the media following an accident. Early speculations about the Spanair accident suggested that the plane crashed because of loss of engine power. People thought this because surviving passengers had said they saw flames and then heard an explosion before the Spanair jet crashed. However, footage from the security camera did not show an explosion or a fire during the departure. The video showed the plane performing a long takeoff roll and falling after a few hundred feet. Later on in the investigation, authorities also released information that a central computer system used to monitor technical problems in the aircraft was infected with malware. The malware could have infected the computer in a number of ways, such as through a USB sticks or the network. Therefore it was surmised that the computer may have failed to detect three technical problems with aircraft, all of which should have been addressed before the Crew attempted to perform the takeoff. To establish the findings, causes, and recommendations associated with the accident, a team of investigators, or the "party members" as we referred to ear­lier in this chapter, formed to gather and analyze clues. The investigation party included members from the following organizations: • Spanish Civil Aviation Accident and Incident Investigation Commission • United States national transportation safety board • European Aviation Safety Agency • international civil aviation organization • federal aviation administration • Boeing • Pratt and Whitney • Spanair With such a team of highly skilled professionals, investigators were able to conduct several engineering and technical analyses with data collected from the wreckage. Tests centered on the flaps and slats. Parts from these components were sent to the National Institute for Aerospace Technology for analysis. The light bulbs were also looked at to determine the operating conditions that existed dur­ing the sequence of the impacts of the aircraft with the terrain. Such analyses can reveal if a bulb was illuminated at the time of impact and can thus help investiga­tors determine if certain systems were on or off at the time of the accident. Much of the technical investigation focused on why the takeoff warning sys­tem (TOWS) did not function as expected, which if it had, would quite possibly have prevented the accident by warning that the aircraft was not properly config­ured for takeoff. If such a warning had been issued, it would have been reason­able to expect the Pilots to have aborted the takeoff while still at relatively slow speed, thus completely preventing the accident. The technical analysis of the TOWS required a teardown of the R2-5 Relay, as shown in Figure 6-12. Unfortunately, the findings of the analysis were not conclusive, which means that the investigators knew that the TOWS had failed to properly function, but were not able to fully determine the reasons behind the failure. A human factors investigation was performed in addition to the technical and engineering analyses. With the Spanair Flight 5022 accident, investigators looked at training procedures, company policies, structure and organization, and operational procedures. An interesting finding was that the company's policy was to compensate passengers if the airplane doors were closed more than 15 minutes after the scheduled departure time for reasons that were attributed to the company. Could it be that the pilots felt pressed to leave on time as a result of this policy? Results of audits were also scrutinized. Boeing had noted that takeoff and approach briefings sounded memorized and too long. FINDINGS After the investigators collected and analyzed all the information, it was time to write the accident report. One key section of the report is the Findings, which for Spanair Flight 5022 resulted in a long list of 78 total findings. Several major findings are listed below: • The Crew did not observe the sterile cockpit principle. In addition to using cel­lular telephones while taxiing, they held conversations in the cockpit with a third person on topics that were irrelevant to their flight activities. This contributed to distracting the crew from its flight duties. • The Pilots used the Spanair checklists but did not fully complete them. Some items in the checklists were omitted, and the actions required in other items were not carried out. Deviations occurred during the execution of operation procedures and the lack of oversight resulted in the flaps and slats not being selected to the proper position and then subsequently not verified as being in the correct position. • When the "After Start" checklist was interrupted, the Crew missed its first opportunity to verify that the airplane was properly configured for takeoff. • By omitting the "Takeoff Briefing" item in the "Taxi" checklist and doing a visual inspection during the "Takeoff imminent" checklist that did not constitute an actual confirmation of the position of the flaps and slats, the Crew missed additional opportunities to notice and correct their error in configuring the airplane. • The TOWS did not issue any warnings during the takeoff run regarding the improper configurations of the airplane. CAUSES Once the findings have been established, investigators determine the causes. Doing this allows safety professionals to build up to the most important part of the report, which will be the recommendations. In the accident report of Spanair Flight 5022, the Commission determined that the Crew had lost control of the plane as a result of stall. The stall was initiated by the improper configuration of flaps and slats that stemmed from mistakes made by the Pilots. The Crew did not detect that the plane was in the wrong configuration because they did not properly use the checklists, which would have prompted them to verify the position of the flap/slats when preparing for the flight. Items they neglected to do during the process include the following: • Selecting the flap/slats with the associated control lever in the "After Start" checklist • Cross-checking the flap and slat indicating lights when executing the "After Start" checklist • Checking the flaps and slats during the "Takeoff briefing" during the "Taxi" checklist • A last check of configuration during the "final" items on the "Takeoff Imminent" checklist. There were also a few items that were contributing factors to the crash. First, the takeoff warning system did not alert the Pilots that the takeoff configuration was incorrect. However, the reason for this failure could not be established by the investigation team. Second, improper crew resource management caused a devia­tion from normal operating procedures during unscheduled interruptions to flight preparations. RECOMMENDATIONS The accident report is all about the recommendations. Establishing the findings and causes paves the way for crafting them. Looking at the recommendations for Spanair Flight 5022 will help tie together all the pieces of the investigation and report together. The team released several preliminary safety recommendations and another with the publication of the report. A few of the initial recommendations are listed below, accompanied by the status of the recommendation. Seeing the responses demonstrate how it can be difficult to make change within the industry. • REC 01/09. It is recommended that the federal aviation administration and european union aviation safety agency require the manu­facturer, the Boeing Company, to include in its Aircraft Maintenance Manual (AMM) for the DC-9 and MD-80 series, in the Troubleshooting Manual (TSM) for the MD-90 series, and in the Fault Isolation Manual (FIM) for the Boeing 717 series, specifically identified instructions to detect the cause and to trouble­shoot the fault involving the heating of the ram air temperature probe while on the ground. " . . . the Maintenance Manual used in conjunction with the • federal aviation administration Response. wiring diagrams is sufficient for solving malfunctions in the ram air tempera­ture probe system." The federal aviation administration also emphasized that it was necessary to adhere to standard operating procedures to avoid risks associated with improper take­off configuration in aircraft in this mode. The Commission did not find this response satisfactory. • european union aviation safety agency Response: None. • REC 1 1109. It is recommended that european union aviation safety agency revise the accompanying guidelines and the clarifying material for the CS-25 certification regulations for large trans­port airplanes so as to consider the human errors associated with faults in take­off configurations when analytically justifying the safety of the takeoff warning system, and to analyze whether the assumptions used when evaluating these sys­tems during their certification are consistent with existing operational experience and with the lessons learned from accidents and incidents. • european union aviation safety agency Response. There is a requirement that already mandates an analysis be done so that potential errors a flight crew might reasonably be expected to make are taken into consideration when designing systems. european union aviation safety agency added that all in-service history shows all of these stipulations to be adequate. A review of reported events revealed that all of them involved airplanes as old as or older than the MD-82. Therefore, CS-25 does need to be modified. However, the Commission has not fully provided ways to execute this recommendation. Some of the new safety recommendations issued with the report included the following: • It is recommended that the federal aviation administration and european union aviation safety agency require takeoff stall recovery as part of initial and recurring training programs of airline transport pilots. • It is recommended that EASA, in keeping with international civil aviation organization initiatives, introduce in its regulations the concept of critical phases of flight and define those activities con­sidered acceptable during said phases. • It is recommended that european union aviation safety agency develop guidance material for the preparation, evaluation, and modification of checklists associated with normal, abnormal, and emergency procedures that are based on the criteria that govern safety man­agement systems. • It is recommended that european union aviation safety agency clarify whether or not checklists are subject to the acceptance of national authorities and, if so, that it draft instructions so that said authorities apply uniform criteria and methodologies, such as methods for assessing the systems and procedures in use at the operators for managing checklists and quality assurance systems in general. • It is recommended that european union aviation safety agency standardize the crew resource management training that must be provided to the operations inspectors of national authorities and define the criteria that must be met by said inspectors in order to exercise their duties as inspectors in the area of crew resource management. • It is recommended that Spanair revise its quality assurance system so that the implementation of any corrective measures adopted by its maintenance organiza­tion is effectively monitored CONCLUSION It is human nature to speculate, particularly when powerful emotional events are shrouded in mystery. Aircraft accidents prompt strong emotional responses and confusion. We want fast answers to complex problems; unfortunately though, understanding the reasons behind an aircraft accident requires patience. The mark of a seasoned accident investigator is having the discipline to resist speculating without facts as evidence. Investigators must assemble to carefully collect and analyze data from the accident site and research background issues that were present, all under the care­ful leadership of an IIC. The results from these efforts allow the team to establish findings, causes, and recommendations. Some factors associated with an accident will be considered findings, and some of those findings will be determined to have actually caused the accident. Recommendations crafted to address the causes attempt to prevent events similar not only to the accident that was investigated but also to other accidents as well. Actually creating remedial action based on recommendations can be challenging, given that resources are always limited, and recommended actions often require work, expense, or likely a combination of both. ICAO, the NTSB, and the federal aviation administration are governmental organizations that all play pivotal roles in accident investigation. Given the complexity of accidents and the numerous highly technical aspects that need to be assessed, experts from outside of investigating agencies are heavily relied upon for insights into how components and systems must function and how they may have contributed to an accident. The national transportation safety board refers to the use of such experts as the party system. The technical or engi­neering analyses and the human factors analyses are the two major components of accident investigations. The Spanair Flight 5022 tragedy provides a poignant example of the challenges of modern accident investigations in commercial aviation. The difficulties of controlling human error, the complexities of investigative techniques, and the pressure placed by external stakeholder groups, such as law firms and family members, all must be managed adroitly by the team charged with finding out what happened, why it happened, and how to prevent it from happening again. KEY TERMS Accredited Representative Aircraft Accident and Incident Investigation (ICAO Annex 1 3 ) Aviation Disaster Family Assistance Act of 1996 Black Boxes Board of Inquiry Cause ield Investigation Final Accident Report Findings Go-team Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 International Society of Air Safety Investigators Investigator-in-Charge Multicausality National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) national transportation safety board Board Members national transportation safety board Most Wanted List Office of Administrative Law JudgesOffice of Aviation Safety Party System Probable Cause Recommendations Safety Risk Management Three-Step Causation Test Transportation Disaster Assistance Division REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. How would you explain the importance of aircraft accident investigation to someone with no aviation background? 2. Detail how the findings, causes, and recommendations of an accident report complement each other. Can you paint the same story of an accident if you were to exclude one of these elements from the accident report? 3. Discuss the role of international civil aviation organization and national transportation safety board in international aviation accident investi­gations. What is an accredited representative? 4. What are the primary responsibilities of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) ? Describe the types of accidents investigated by the NTSB. Describe the organizational structure of the NTSB. 5. Do you think there are any disadvantages to the national transportation safety board operating as a separate entity from the FAA? 6. Explain the role of the national transportation safety board investigator-in-charge (IIC) and the national transportation safety board go-team. What is the so-called party system that enables the national transportation safety board to leverage its limited resources? Identify the steps taken in a major accident inves­ tigation. What types of activities are performed at the NTSB's laboratory in Washington, D.C. ? When are safety recommendations made? 7. What is the purpose of a public hearing? Are hearings ever reopened? What information is included in the final accident report? Distinguish between field investigation and a limited investigation of a general-aviation accident. 8. Describe the responsibilities of the federal aviation administration during a major accident investigation. 9. Describe some of the functions of the national transportation safety board besides accident investigation. 10. What is the purpose of the national transportation safety board Most Wanted List? 11. Which item from the national transportation safety board Most Wanted List to do you think poses the biggest threat to aviation safety and why? 12. In the Spanair Flight 5022, where do you think there were breakdowns in crew resource management? Why do you think this accident happened?