Title: Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study – An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Process – Chapter 6 Author(s): Report federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, federal aviation administration Conclusions The Certification Process Study evaluated processes associated with the certification, operations, and maintenance of commercial transport airplanes. Particular attention was given to the processes associated with the interfaces between the certification, operations, and maintenance functions as depicted by the arrows in Figure 6. The study identified fifteen findings and two observations in the following categories: • Safety Assurance Processes •Aviation Safety Data Management • Maintenance/Operations/Certification Interfaces •Major Repairs and Modifications • Safety Oversight Processes The team identified four areas of commonality in the findings and observations (this list is not all-inclusive): Information Flow Critical information may not be available to those who could act upon it. Organizational barriers to communication, failure to recognize the need to communicate, information overload, and language differences may all contribute to information flow breakdowns. Human Factors Failure to account for the human element is a common thread in accidents. Faulty assumptions, incomplete understanding of tasks, and poor feedback of actual human responses may all contribute to mistakes or failures in the human/machine interface. Lessons Learned Significant safety issues learned through accidents are sometimes lost with time and must be re-learned at a very high price. The absence of a comprehensive lessons-learned database, general or non-existent requirements, constraints on information sharing, and loss of corporate knowledge may all contribute to problems being repeated. Accident Precursors Awareness that certain service incidents are effective indicators of the need for intervention measures requires airplane-level safety awareness acquired through both training and experience. Risk management tools and understanding of lessons learned are vital in developing the skills necessary to consistently recognize accident precursor events and initiate corrective actions. Figure 7 indicates how various other perspectives may be useful in identifying the commonalities among the findings and observations. It must be stressed that the findings and observations in this study are clearly interrelated and should not be addressed in isolation. Safety Awareness at the Airplane Level Many of the accidents reviewed during this study followed one or more previous incidents that were not acted upon because those involved in industry and government were unaware of the significance of what they had observed. Often, the reason for this lack of awareness was a failure to view the significance of the event at the airplane level rather than at the system or subsystem level. This airplane-level perspective allows the interface areas to be most apparent, such as human factors considerations of a maintenance task and specific flight crew procedures necessary for system failure intervention. This is also the attribute of a safety specialist that is most difficult to attain, as it depends to a very large extent on the experience of the individual combined with technical capability. Safety awareness at the airplane level is needed for all key safety specialists regardless of their organization and is achieved by both proper training and adequate experience, as illustrated in Figure 8. Safety initiatives could be better coordinated and more effective if the operator, manufacturer, and federal aviation administration could achieve and maintain this level of safety awareness. Cultural Change Traditional relationships among the regulators and industry have inherent constraints that have, in some cases, limited the ability to effectively identify and act on accident precursors. Further safety improvements will require significant intra- and inter-organizational cultural changes to facilitate a more open exchange of information. Regulatory solutions alone cannot achieve the desired results. Solutions are Interrelated Among Manufacturers, Operators, and FAA. Improvements to the safety processes identified in this study will require the manufacturer, operator, and federal aviation administration to work together with coordinated initiatives (see Figure 9). It will be necessary for each organization to enlist the support of a workforce with the necessary safety knowledge and experience, including expanding knowledge in the major interface areas such as those identified in this study. From the information gathered during this study, it is clear that process improvements could be applied in certain key areas, particularly those interfaces with safety implications. Process improvements alone will not improve safety unless regulators and industry work together towards this goal. It will require personnel with special skills, knowledge, and experience to recognize lessons learned and accident precursors and to properly apply risk management tools and techniques. Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) These programs are intended to provide air carriers with the opportunity to identify and report safety issues to management and the federal aviation administration for resolution without fear of punitive legal enforcement action being taken. These programs are designed to encourage participation from employee groups such as flight crew members, mechanics, flight attendants, and dispatchers. For example, a partnership between American Airlines, the pilots’ union, and the federal aviation administration encourages pilots to anonymously disclose safety problems for the purpose of sharing information. It is designed to identify and reduce or eliminate possible flight safety concerns, as well as minimize deviations from the regulations. Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) Administered by national aeronautics and space administration for the FAA, the aviation safety report system receives, processes, analyzes, interprets, and reports safety data provided voluntarily by pilots, controllers, flight attendants, mechanics, and other users of the national airspace system. Reports may not be used for enforcement action by the FAA. The database information may be considered for making systemic safety changes. Continued Operational Safety Program (COSP) FAA-Boeing partnership initiative that implemented the continued operational safety Working Agreement on October 1, 1999, to accomplish the following: • In-service events are screened by Boeing service engineering for reportable events. The list of events to be reported goes beyond FAR 21.3 requirements in accordance with the continued operational safety Working Agreement. • Event reports are submitted by Internet file transfer and loaded into the ACO database daily. The events are distributed and tracked within the federal aviation administration from event to closure or AD issuance. federal aviation administration Chief Information Office (AIO-1) The federal aviation administration operates or develops over 640 information systems as part of carrying out its mission. The federal aviation administration must decide which information systems to buy off the shelf, which to develop and build, to retire, and which to upgrade, and then smartly execute those decisions. The main focus of this office is to implement new management techniques to improve these critical investment decisions and help manage them more effectively so as to receive maximum value for our scarce investment dollars. Damage Tolerance: The attribute of the structure that permits it to retain its required residual strength for a period of use after the structure has sustained a given level of fatigue, corrosion, or discrete source damage. Flight Operational Quality Assurance flight operations quality assurance programs would give the federal aviation administration access to in-flight recorded data collected by airlines to improve safety in the following areas: flight crew performance, training, air traffic procedures, airport maintenance and design, and aircraft operations and design. Airline participation is voluntary. The FAA, labor, and industry are working with national aeronautics and space administration Ames on research and development. A model program has been initiated with some major airlines. Global Aviation Information Network (GAIN) GAIN is designed to help the aviation industry prevent accidents by making safety information available to aviation professionals worldwide who can use it to improve safety. By learning more about potential problems, the GAIN participants can use the information to address problems proactively. Actions could include pilot training, procedural changes to manuals, modifications to air traffic control procedures, changes to maintenance or manufacturing procedures, and design changes. The privately owned and operated international system will draw from various worldwide aviation information sources. Metadata is the information that provides the unique identification of the data itself, a data fingerprint, and is used to facilitate data retrieval. National Aviation Safety Data Analysis Center (NASDAC) The NASDAC is an automated support capability that enables users to apply powerful state-of-the-art analysis tools to an integrated database containing safety data from multiple sources. The NASDAC database currently includes data from over 20 source systems. A walk-in NASDAC facility is open in the federal aviation administration Headquarters building. Program Tracking and Reporting System (PTRS) The PTRS system is a database management tool that is designed to record certain work activities in the Aviation Safety Program to assist program analysis and future planning. It provides a database to indicate geographic areas, organizations, and operators who have supported or have been supported by the safety program within the previous three years. Safety Performance Analysis System (SPAS) SPAS is a computer-based system designed to help inspectors identify potential safety risks by tracking the performance of operators, aircraft, and personnel. Service Difficult Report Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations requires that holders of certificates issued under parts 121, 125, 127, or 135 submit reports on certain specified failures, malfunctions, defects of specific systems and on all other failures, malfunctions, or defects that, in the opinion of the certificate holder, have endangered or may endanger the safe operation of an aircraft. Certificated domestic and foreign repair stations are also required to report defects or recurring unairworthy conditions on any aircraft, powerplant, propeller, or any component thereof to the FAA. Stovepiping The concept of stovepiping is derived from a factory setting, where separate ovens are burning fuel and emitting smoke and heat. Each stovepipe is a separate and distinct operation from the beginning of its process until the work cycle has been completed. In the context of this report, stovepiping is a euphemism for holding onto information or the absence or lack of coordination and communication among various functional lines of business.