Title: Commercial Aviation Safety– Chapter 10 – 11 - 12 Author(s): Stephen K. Cusick; Antonio I. Cortes; Clarence C. Rodrigues Category: Aircraft, Certification, Regulations Tags: Regulations, Safety, Airworthiness, Certification, Accidents Chapter 10 AIR TRAFFIC SAFETY SYSTEMS INTRODUCTION While some of the previous few chapters in this book focused on how aircraft and airports are designed for safety, once commercial flights become airborne they navigate through what is often highly complex airspace and rely on an intricate air traffic system and human controllers for separation and sequencing. We have come a long way since pilots used to navigate by light from signal fires and land on run­ways at night using the illumination of headlights from cars. However, we still have a long way to go to efficiently accommodate the expected growth in air traffic with NextGen and Unmanned Aircraft Systems under constant development. According to the FAA's Air Traffic by the Numbers Web site (FAA.gov, 2016), there are 7,000 aircraft in the sky over the United States at any given time, result­ing in 23,9 1 1 commercial flights that fly over 2.2 million passengers each day, all of which are directed by 14,000 air traffic controllers. The mission of the Air Traffic Control (ATC) system is to promote the safe, orderly, and expeditious flow of aircraft through the nation's airspace. Today's National Airspace System (NAS) has evolved over several decades into a developed infrastructure requiring thou­sands of employees and billions of taxpayer dollars to administer. Once a commercial airliner is airborne and into the airspace, crews constantly assess factors such as aircraft weight, fuel burn, winds aloft, cloud buildups, and turbulence in order to optimize their route and altitude. This results in frequent requests to air traffic control for changes which must be balanced against potential conflicts from other traffic in the immediate airspace. Often the results are of short dura­tion, such as pilots desiring to deviate laterally to avoid a cloud buildup that may contain severe turbulence and then returning to the pre-agreed flight path once past the buildup. In other cases, the requested deviations may be significant, such as a descent to a lower altitude due to the need to operate anti-ice systems that reduce the available thrust to engines and make maintaining the current altitude untenable. To manage the airspace and its traffic, modern air traffic controllers rely heav­ily and increasingly on new Next Generation (NextGen) air traffic control technologies, as shown in Figure 1 0- 1 . These advancements are increasing with major reliance on the Global Positioning System (CPS) navigational tools available. It is anticipated that the role of modern air traffic control professionals will continuously evolve as automation increases, much in the way that the role of the aviator was shown to be evolving in Chapter 4 of this book. A short history of the U.S. air traffic control system is helpful to understand its current state. Here we examine the history that has brought us the air traffic control system of today, some of the basic components of the system, recent improve­ments, and current efforts to take air traffic control into the future. MAJOR MILESTONES OF A TC HISTORY • June 1 956. Midair collision over the Grand Canyon in Arizona, killing all 128 occupants of the two airplanes, a TWA Super Constellation and a United Air Lines DC-7. The accident happened in clear weather under visual flight rules (VFR) in uncontrolled airspace. Such sightseeing detours over the Grand Canyon were a com­mon practice at the time. The accident highlighted that much of the airspace in the United States was uncontrolled without radar above 20,000 feet. It also spawned the overhaul of air traffic control operations, introducing modern radar systems, requirement of the flight data recorder in airplanes, and the development of the FAA. • December 1 960. The federal aviation administration was only 2 years old when another disastrous midair collision occurred over New York City. A TWA Super Constellation and a United Air Lines DC-8, both in a holding pattern under instrument flight rules (IFR), collided killing all aboard. The United Air Lines aircraft had navigational prob­lems and excessive speed, which could not be detected by the New York air traffic control towers that lacked proper surveillance radar equipment. As a result of the acci­dent, there were equipment upgrades and a new regulation mandating the limit of 250 knots airspeed when within 30 nautical miles of the airport and below 10,000 feet altitude. • August 1981 . Over 12,000 U.S. air traffic controllers went on strike over labor conditions and were fired by the FAA. It took almost 10 years before overall air traffic control staffing levels returned to normal. • January 1 982. The federal aviation administration released the first NAS Plan, a comprehensive 20-year blueprint to modernize air traffic control and air navigation systems in the United States. • April 2000. Creation of the federal aviation administration Air Traffic Organization (ATO), a performance­based department focusing on efficient operation of the U.S. air traffic control system. • December 2003. Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) concept was authorized, a new, ambitious, multiagency effort to develop a modern air transportation system for the 21st century. This system faces significant chal­lenges changing air traffic control from a radar-based to a satellite-based navigation and communication system. • Today. NextGen development continues based on GPS and computer science technology. The advent of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), aka "Drones," is creating a paradigm shift in air traffic control challenges. The following section will discuss the fundamental components of the U.S. air traffic control system. A detailed discussion of this subject would require many chapters and, therefore, is outside the scope of this textbook. Since this area is changing rapidly, we recommend readers to consult the latest federal aviation administration and international civil aviation organization Web sites for more information. BASIC COMPONENTS OF THE air traffic control SYSTEM AIRSPACE CLASSIFICATION In the United States, the federal aviation administration has designated four categories of airspace as follows: • Positive controlled airspace. These are areas in which the federal aviation administration is responsible for separation of all aircraft, whether under VFR, see and avoid, or IFR. Examples of positive control areas are high-density airports and very high altitude flights above 1 8,000 feet mean sea level. • Controlled airspace. Areas in which air traffic control separates instrument flight rules traffic, but visual flight rules pilots provide their own separation, weather permitting. • Uncontrolled airspace. The pilots themselves provide all aircraft separation; air traffic control services are not provided by the FAA. • Special use airspace. Areas where air traffic may be prohibited or restricted with special rules such as the airspace around the White House in Washington, D.C. Airspace classifications and communication requirements are taught in basic flight training, which are beyond the scope of this textbook. The basic communication and Navigational airborne integrated data system (NAVAIDS) to aviation have changed little since the 1970s. Air traffic controllers operate primarily from three types of facilities. These basic air traffic control facilities are as follows: • Airport traffic control towers (ATCTs) • Terminal radar approach control (TRACON) facilities • Air route traf fic control centers (ARTCCs) Some of the basic NAVAIDS and radar surveillance equipment used in this system are the following: • very high frequency Omni-directional Range (VOR) and Distance Measuring Equipment (DME) stations which transmit signals along "airways," highways in the sky, to route air traffic. • Instrument Landing System (ILS), which is a precision approach and landing airport information desk that normally consists of a localizer, a glide slope, marker beacon, and an approach light system. • Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR), used in conjunction with a transponder radar beacon device, is an approach control radar system used to separate aircraft within the immediate vicinity of an airport; it normally has a maximum range of 60 nautical miles. PERFORMANCE-BASED NAVIGATION (PBN) The arrival of GPS navigation tools has caused a major restructuring of air traffic control procedures. The federal aviation administration has recently announced its strategic goal to make PBN the nation's primary means of navigation in the next 15 years. An in-depth discussion of PBN is beyond the scope of this textbook, so we will only discuss the highlights. In general the area of performance-based navigation (PBN) can be divided into two major sub areas: 1. Area navigation (RNAV) is a term describing different technologies that enable aircraft navigation on any desired course within the coverage of specific naviga­tion signals. area navigation may consist of station-to-station navigation, or it may be between random waypoints offset from published routes depending upon the type of equipment used. Basically, area navigation will develop in the coming years as a GPS­dependent system, independent of the many VOR/DME navigational airborne integrated data system that will slowly be phased out as part of the NextGen federal aviation administration modernization program. 2. Required navigation performance (RNP) is a type of PBN that allows an aircraft to fly a specific path between two 3D-defined points in space. Area navigation (RNAV) and RNP systems are fundamentally similar, the key difference between them is the requirement for RNP on-board performance monitoring while flying curved approach paths to an airport. This navigational program is growing as airports and aircraft are configured for this type of precision approach. GPS ENHANCEMENTS For many years, the U.S. aviation navigation system was composed of ground­based systems whose signals were used by aircraft avionics for en route navigation and landing guidance. Despite the large number of ground systems, navigation signals did not cover all airports and airspace. Over the next several years, the aviation navigation system is expected to greatly increase its use of GPS satellites to provide navigation signal coverage throughout the NAS. Global Positioning System is a space-based positioning, velocity and time sys­tem, developed and operated by the U.S. Department of Defense and composed of space, control, and user segments. The space segment is composed of 21 satellites (plus three operational spares) in six orbital planes. The control segment consists of five monitor stations, three ground antennas, and a master control station. The user segment consists of antennas and receiver-processors that provide positioning, velocity, and precise timing to the user. Reliance on ground-based navigation airborne integrated data system will decline as satellite navigation provides equivalent or better levels of service. A transition to satellite navigation significantly expands navigation and landing capabilities, improving safety and efficient use of airspace. In addition, it will reduce the FAA's need to replace many aging ground systems, decrease the amount of avionics required to be carried in aircraft, and simplify navigation and landing procedures. WmE AREA AuGMENTATION SYSTEM Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) is an extremely accurate navigation airport information desk developed for civil aviation to augment the Global Positioning System. Before WAAS, the U.S. National Airspace System (NAS) did not have the potential to provide horizontal and vertical navigation for approach operations for all users at all locations. With WAAS, this capability is a reality. WAAS provides service for all classes of aircraft in all phases of flight including en route navigation, airport depar­tures, and airport arrivals. This includes vertically guided landing approaches in instrument meteorological conditions at all qualified locations throughout the NAS. ADVANTAGES OF SATELLITE-BASED NAVIGATION Satellite-based navigation provides significant operational and safety benefits over past methods that relied on ground-based navigation aids. The new mode of navigation meets the needs of growing operations because pilots will be able to navigate virtually anywhere in the NAS, including to airports that currently lack ground navigation and landing signal coverage. Satellite-based navigation will support PBN direct routes. With satellite navigation, the number of published precision approaches has also greatly increased so that in addition to actually finding airports pilots can also successfully land there during inclement weather conditions. In addition, combining GPS with flight deck electronic terrain maps and ground-proximity warning systems can help pilots reduce flight profiles that expose them to controlled flight into terrain (CFIT) . Satellite-based navigation also decreases the number of ground-based naviga­tion systems, thereby reducing infrastructure costs. For a precision approach today, each runway end needs a dedicated ILS. GPS/WAAS can provide the precision approach guidance for most of the runways in the NAS using area navigation and RNP procedures which are quickly expanding across the country. TERMINAL AuTOMATION MoDERNIZATION AND REPLACEMENT (TAMR) The FAA's terminal automation modernization and replacement (TAMR) program is upgrading air traffic control systems at terminal radar approach control (TRACON) facili­ties across the national air space (NAS) with the Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System (STARS) platform. TAMR will combine and upgrade air traffic control technologies to the STARS which is a single, state-of-the-art platform that will be installed at TRACONS and control towers. When fully operational, the STARS sys­tem will perform as follows: • Maintain safety while increasing cost-effectiveness at terminal facilities across the NAS. • Provide advanced functionalities for controllers, such as state-of-the-art flat­panel LED display and the ability to save controller workstation preferences. • Offer maintenance improvements to keep equipment up and running. Terminal automation systems receive surveillance data and aircraft flight plan information. Controllers at radar control facilities use these systems to manage air traffic immediately around major airports, and technicians maintain these systems at facilities. These systems enable controllers to provide the following air traffic control services that are critical to the safety of the national airspace: • Separating and sequencing of aircraft • Conflict and terrain avoidance alerts • Weather advisories • Radar vectoring for departing and arriving traffic UPDATE ON federal aviation administration NEXTGEN BACKBONE PROGRAMS Through its NextGen program, the federal aviation administration has taken major steps to enhance safety and improve efficiency in our nation's airspace. NextGen is a comprehensive mod­ernization of state-of-the-art technologies and procedures that, in short, enable aircraft to move from Point A to Point B more efficiently and directly than ever before. This is truly a "work in progress," so for the latest information on federal aviation administration NextGen programs, the reader is urged to visit the federal aviation administration Web site. The major backbone programs of NextGen include the following: • Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) is FAA's satellite-based successor to radar. ADS-B makes use of GPS technology to determine and share precise aircraft location information and streams additional flight information to the cockpits of properly equipped aircraft. The federal aviation administration has set a goal that ADS-B will be fully operational by the year 2020. U.S. airlines are on track to meet this goal; however, the general aviation industry is struggling to meet this deadline date. • Collaborative Air Traffic Management Technologies (CATMT) is a suite of enhancements to the decision-support and data-sharing tools used by air traf­fic management personnel. These enhancements will enable a more collabora­tive environment among controllers and operators, improving efficiency in the National Airspace System. • Data Communications (Data Comm) will enable controllers to send digital instructions and clearances to pilots rather than relying solely on voice commu­nications. Precise clearance messages from air traffic control that appear on a cockpit display can also interact with an aircraft's Flight Management Systems (FMS) computer. As of this publication, federal aviation administration control towers in over 50 locations have installed Data Comm equipment. In the near future Data Comm will supplant voice communica­tions as the primary means of communication between controllers and flight crews. • National Airspace System Voice System (NVS) will supplant FAA's aging analog voice communication system with state-of-the-art digital technology. NVS will standardize the voice communication infrastructure among federal aviation administration facilities, and provide greater flexibility to the air traffic control system. • System Wide Information Management (SWIM) is the network backbone structure that will carry NextGen digital information. SWIM will enable cost­effective, real-time data exchange and sharing among users of the National Airspace System. • NextGen Weather will help reduce weather impacts by producing and delivering tailored aviation weather products via SWIM, helping controllers and opera­tors develop reliable flight plans, make better decisions, and improve on-time performance. NextGen Weather is accomplished through collaboration between FAA, NOAA, and NASA. The efficient handling of new weather products will greatly improve traffic flow management (TFM) throughout the National Airspace System. Terminal Flight Data Manager (TFDM) modernizes air traffic control tower equipment and processes. Using SWIM capabilities, TFDM will share real-time data among controllers, aircraft operators, and airports so they can better stage arrivals and departures for greater efficiency on the airport surface. The federal aviation administration currently projects that TFDM processes will roll out in 2019. AIRPoRT SuRFACE DETECTION EQUIPMENT, MoDEL X (ASDE-X) As frequently noted by the federal aviation administration and NTSB, the potential for runway incursions and collisions on taxiways increases each year. That is due to the continuing increase in air traffic and the associated increased frequency of aircraft operating in close proximity to each other on airport surfaces. To combat this risk, the federal aviation administration has deployed Airport Surf ace Detection Equipment, Model X (ASDE-X) at major U.S. airports. This system allows controllers to detect potential runway conflicts by providing detailed coverage of movement from surface radar, ADS-B sensors aboard aircraft, and aircraft transponders, among other sources. This technology is especially useful for controllers at night or in weather conditions of poor visibility where airport traffic is not easy to spot visually. DEPARTURES AND ARRIVALS Resolving congestion at the busiest U.S. airports requires a combination of mod­ern technology and additional runways. As depicted in Figure 10-2, engineers and technicians are testing airborne spacing for terminal arrival routes. The federal aviation administration is working with airport operators to plan and develop new runways to accommodate increased aircraft operations and use new technologies, while meeting environmen­tal requirements. Arriving and departing aircraft are sequenced in and out of the airport by air traffic controllers at the TRACON facilities. Maintaining a steady flow of aircraft, particularly during peak periods, can be improved by providing controllers with tools for sequencing and spacing aircraft more precisely so that more can fit into any given amount of airspace. The objective is to reduce variability in services and optimize use of airspace and available runways. En Route And Oceanic Operations The evolution toward a NextGen environment requires significant improvements in en route and oceanic computer systems and controller decision support tools. The aging automation infrastructure must be replaced before new applications and improved services can be provided. Currently, en route and oceanic facilities are co-located but do not share com­mon systems, primarily because of the lack of surveillance and direct communica­tions services over large portions of the oceans on Earth. The addition of oceanic surveillance and real-time direct communications will enable oceanic services to gradually become comparable with en route services, and oceanic and en route systems will evolve to a common hardware and software environment. Within both the Atlantic and Pacific airspaces, federal aviation administration controllers monitor aircraft position using Advanced Technologies and Ocean Procedures (A TOPs) equipment. In the domestic airspace, aircraft are monitored by radar and typically follow the fixed route structure of airways, which prevents pilots from flying the most direct route or taking advantage of favorable winds. In oceanic airspace, aircraft fol­low "tracks" that are aligned each day with prevailing winds. The frequent lack of radar surveillance and direct controller-pilot communications often requires oceanic separation standards to be 20 times greater than those in domestic airspace. The large separations limit the number of available tracks. Therefore, some flights are assigned a less than optimum altitude in order to still transit the airspace without undue delay, and there is insufficient opportunity to adjust altitudes to conserve fuel. Additional tracks and access to optimum altitudes would reduce fuel consump­tion and costs substantially. Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums (RVSM) are evolving and showing great promise. When fully operational, ADS-B, ATOPs, and RVSM will reduce the required aircraft separation substantially. This will improve the efficiency of oceanic routes and reduce controller workload. UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS REVOLUTION BACKGROUND A major change in the area of Airspace Safety has been the rapid growth in the development of Unmanned Aircraft Systems. UAS (often called "Drones" or UAVs) have been around for many years and have proven their value in many military applications. Today, entrepreneurs are exploring new and innovative ways to use drones for commercial purposes. Some examples of applications include law enforcement, package delivery, filmmaking, agriculture, search and rescue, security inspections, photography, real estate listings, etc., and the list goes on and on. The federal aviation administration estimates that the drone industry will be a huge boost to the U.S. economy, generating over $80 billion and creating more than 1 00,000 jobs over the next 1 0 years. The possibilities for UAS use are endless, and we will undoubtedly see pressure to fully integrate drones safely into the NAS in the coming years. Section 333 of the federal aviation administration Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 (FMRA) granted the U.S. Secretary of Transportation the authority to determine whether an airworthiness certificate was required for a UAS to operate safely in the National Airspace System (NAS). federal aviation administration began issuing 333 exemptions in September 2014 as a stopgap measure to allow certain low-risk commercial drones to operate while the industry waited for the full regulations. Now, the federal aviation administration has issued a new UAS final rule to regulate the operation and certification of Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS). FAR PART 107: THE SMALL UAS RuLE (FAA SAFETY BRIEFING) The Small UAS rule adds a new FAR Part 1 07 to 14 code of federal regulations to allow for routine civil operation of small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS) in the National Airspace System (NAS) and provide safety rules for those operations. The rule defines small UAS as unmanned aircraft weighing less than 55 pounds. To mitigate risk, this rule limits small UAS to daylight and civil twilight operations with appropriate collision lighting, confined areas of operation, and visual-line-of-sight operations. The rule addresses airspace restrictions, remote pilot certification, visual observer requirements, and operational limits in order to maintain the safety of the NAS and ensure that small UAS do not pose a threat to national security. Because UAS constitute a quickly changing technology, a key provision of this rule is a waiver mechanism to allow individual operations to deviate from many of the operational restrictions of the rule if the federal aviation administration Administrator finds that the pro­posed operation can safely be conducted under the terms of a certificate of waiver. This new rule became effective August 29, 2016. It is important to note that FAR Part 1 07 does not apply to model aircraft like noncommercial drones and radio-controlled aircraft. Model aircraft operators and recreational drone users must continue to satisfy all the criteria specified in Section 336 of the FMRA, including the stipulation they be operated only for hobby or recreational purposes. FLYING DRONES CoMMERCIALLY The new rules are long and complex, so a detailed discussion is beyond the scope of the textbook. Below is a short summary of the basic things an operator must know for flying under the small UAS rule under 14 code of federal regulations Part 107. Pilot Requirements to obtain a Remote Pilot Certificate: • Must be at least 1 6 years old • Must pass an initial aeronautical knowledge test at an FAA-approved knowledge testing center • Must be vetted by the Transportation Safety Administration (TSA) (Note: A person who already holds a pilot certificate issued under 14 code of federal regulations Part 61 and has successfully completed a flight review within the previous 24 months can com­plete an approved federal aviation administration Part 107 online training course to satisfy this requirement.) Aircraft Requirements: • UAS must be less than 55 lb • Must be registered with the federal aviation administration Operating Rules: • Drone operation in uncontrolled Class G airspace OK, but otherwise must get permission from air traffic control in controlled airspace • Must keep the aircraft in sight (visual line-of-sight) • Must fly under 400 feet and only during daylight hours • Must fly at or below 100 mph and yield right of way to manned aircraft • Must NOT fly over people and must NOT fly from a moving vehicle (Note: These operating rules are subject to waiver which must be specifically justified by request from the FAA. ) IMPACT TO AIR TRAFFIC CoNTROL After the effective date of August 2016, the drone operators that have successfully passed the required knowledge test and received a remote pilot certificate may begin operations in Class G airspace at or below 400 above ground level without contacting air traffic control or issu­ing a NOTAM. For operations in controlled airspaces (Class B, C, and D airspace, and E surface area) the Air Traffic Control Organization, in collaboration with National Air Traffic Controllers Association (NATCA), is establishing a process where the operator can make a request and receive approval to fly in controlled airspace through an automated system. For more information on the new UAS rule in this quickly changing area, please visit the federal aviation administration UAS Web site (www.faa.gov/UAS). aviation safety report system EXAMPLES Air traffic controllers face many different challenges every day, regardless of which position they work. However, they also have the ability to improve safety by sub­mitting their accounts of incidents to the aviation safety report system or ATSAP database. Below are a few narratives that show the difficulties that controllers see on a daily basis and their dedication to making ground and air operations safe. AIR TRAFFic CoNTROL ToWER Title: Dated facilities affecting controllers' jobs. Aircraft X was cleared to land on the left runway. Aircraft Y was cleared to land on the right runway. My trainee and I were scanning out the window for the air­craft, very dif ficult due to the scratched and dirty shades and the filthy windows. Also the radar does not differentiate which runway aircraft are lined up for. We saw Aircraft X over the numbers for the right runway in landing configura­tion. We were forced to send Aircraft Y around, so that we would not lose run­way separation. No loss of separation occurred. Get new window sun screens, they are badly scratched and dirty. Clean the filthy windows. Align the radar so that we can tell which runway aircraft are landing on, or add a screen we can enlarge the picture on so we can tell which runway aircraft are lined up for. Discussion question for the reader: If you managed the air traffic control tower described in this incident narrative, what message would you send to your controllers regarding the incident in order to promote safety? Arn Route Traffic Control Center Title: Separation errors resulting from fatigue. I was getting busy and was feeling very tired and behind the power curve right from the start. I got a Radar Assist position, but was not even able to get him a proper briefing because of the amount of workload I was handling. I did not put 27000 feet in the data tag on this aircraft. It was still showing 29000 feet caus­ing me to turn him right in front of another aircraft at 28000 feet; however, with the proper turns and pilot's immediate actions I was able to maintain separation. I would not have been able to do so if that pilot was not on top of his game. He was GREAT! I have no excuses to make here. We have been super short staffed and with weather throughout our sectors and more than the normal amount of traffic through this sector I am beat and can only pray we get relief from this shortage soon before something worse happens. Discussion question for the reader: If you managed the center described in this incident narrative, what message would you send to your controllers regarding the incident in order to promote safety? CASE STUDY: THE 2006 MIDAIR COLLISION OVER BRAZIL Air traffic controllers are tasked with a very difficult and complex job. They must constantly monitor their assigned airspace while maintaining contact with pilots who may need route deviations, altitude changes, and speed adjustments. If at any point air traffic controllers are not fully cognizant of everything going on and not following the safeguards that have been put in place, the results can be fatal. Let us look at the details of an accident in Brazil to demonstrate how air traffic control is a critically important prerequisite for safety in the skies. On September 29, 2006, one of the deadliest accidents in Brazilian aviation history occurred, and many have even said that it was the most complex scenarios to investigate in the nation's history. The crash involved a Boeing 737 from Gol Transportes Airlines operating as GOL Flight 1907 and an Embrarer-136 with U.S. registration number N600XL, operating as an executive aircraft under the com­pany ExcelAire Services. The Embraer jet had departed from Sao Jose dos Campos Prof. Urbano Ernesto Stumpf State Airport, and the Boeing jet had departed from Mana us Eduardo Gomes International Airport. While both flights were on their respective routes, they collided at Flight Level 370. The left wing of each aircraft made contact as they passed with a supersonic closure rate, just barely hitting but in the most catastrophic way, as depicted in Figure 10-3. The Embraer jet lost part of the left winglet, sustained damages in the left stabilizer, and left elevator; however, it remained controllable in flight and made an emergency landing at a military facility. Conversely, the Boeing airliner lost about one-third of the left wing in the collision, making it uncontrollable. The ensuing abrupt spiral dive caused the aircraft to come apart in flight before violently impacting the ground in the middle of the thick rainforest. There were no injuries onboard the Embraer jet, but there were no survivors on the Boeing aircraft due to the brutal crash forces. Let us examine the reasons why this midair collision occurred, many of which involve insufficient communication and actions by ATC. Since the safe and orderly flow of traffic requires a team effort that monitors and updates information, it is quite easy for there to be a breakdown somewhere in the system. The contributing factors related to air traffic control below highlight how lack of sufficient attention from only one party in the system is enough to erode safety: • There was an incomplete flight clearance issued by the assistant controller in Sao Paulo and the ground controller at Sao Jose dos Campos. This caused the Embraer jet pilots to believe they could maintain Flight Level 370 all the way to their destination despite a discrepancy with their flight plan. • The controller of sectors 5 and 6 in the Brasilia airspace did not provide the con­troller of sectors 7, 8, and 9 with the necessary information for handing off the Embraer jet. • The air traffic controller for sectors 7, 8, and 9 did not make radio contact with Embraer pilots to change the aircraft's flight level and switch the frequency, thus losing contact with the aircraft. • The air traffic controller of sectors 7, 8, and 9 did not perform the necessary procedures for the loss of transponder and loss of radar. This enabled the Embraer jet to continue flying at the incorrect flight level. • There was lack of communication between sectors and control centers during the coordination and handoff. • There was also a lack of monitoring, advisory, and guidance associated with individual air traffic control decisions at the Brasilia area control center. • Standard procedures were not followed during the hand offs of both aircraft between controllers and also when radar contact was lost with the Embraer jet. To prevent a similar midair collision in the future, the accident investigation team made several recommendations for improving air traffic control communication and pro­ cedures. They included the following: • Instruct the air traffic controllers as to the compliance of the prescribed procedures regarding the air traffic clearances to be transmitted to pilots. • Ensure that all air traffic controllers fully comply with the prescribed air traffic hand-off procedures between adjacent air traffic control units and/or between operational sectors within the unit. • Ensure the development of quality management programs for the air traffic control services in the various control units. • Ensure that the procedures prescribed for the loss of transponder signal and radar contact, especially within RVSM airspace, are complied with by the air traffic control units. • Ensure, by means of a revision of the criteria used in the evaluation of the perfor­mance of air traffic controllers, relative to both basic professional formation and radar specialization courses, that they meet the proficiency levels required for the exercise of the activity. The controllers associated with the Brazil midair collision did not identify and mitigate conflict in airspace, which is an essential job responsibility. In addition, the accident illustrates how accidents are multicausal. There was more than one instance in which controllers did not follow the proper procedures and establish correct communication. For instance, the transponder is an important device for maintaining contact with the pilots. The controllers did not verify the connection, thus disrupting the safety of the airspace. Since the Embraer's transponder was off, it deactivated the traffic collision avoidance system (TCAS) that may have prevented the collision altogether. So the controllers were only one element of the accident sequence of events, which could have been prevented through the action of others. Unfortunately, there were many factors working against safety that day, and we now must rely on the recommendations to prevent such a tragedy from happening again. CONCLUSION It is easy to forget about the role that air traffic controllers play in the aviation field because they are an invisible force. While walking through an airport or wait­ing on the plane, it is common to see the pilots, flight attendants, and ramp work­ers; however, the controllers sit tucked away from everyone else. Even though we do not see them, we must not forget the pivotal role they play in aviation. As this chapter has highlighted, the job of an air traffic controller has evolved over the past several decades. There has been little change in the air traffic system since the 1970s until recent years when the industry has started replacing antiquated technology with new NextGen infrastructure. We will see a shift from equipment like ground-based radar to new programs such as SWIM and DATACOMM under the NextGen framework. Likewise, the tremendous growth in UAS operations will continue to put stress on the air traffic control system. Despite all the changes, the ultimate goal is to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of communication between pilots, aircraft, and ATC. Doing so will improve processes that prevent midair collisions like the 2006 Brazil accident presented in the case study. Ultimately, everyone in the system must play their part to build the safest environment for our skies and ground operations that we can. Air traffic management and related systems serve as a key component in the commercial aviation safety value chain. KEY TERMS Advanced Technologies and Ocean Procedures (ATOPs) Air Route Traffic Control Centers (ARTCCs) Airport Surface Detection Equipment, Model X (ASDE-X) Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR) Airport Traffic Control Towers (ATCTs) Area Navigation (RNAV) Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) Collaborative Air Traffic Management Technologies (CATMT) Controlled Airspace Data Communications (Data Comm) federal aviation administration Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 (FMRA) Global Positioning System (GPS) Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) Instrument Landing System (ILS) National Airspace System Voice System (NVS) Navigational airborne integrated data system (NAVAIDS) NextGen Weather Performance-Based Navigation (PBN) Positive Controlled Airspace Reduced Vertical Separation Minimums (RVSM) Required Navigation Performance (RNP) Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS) Special Use Airspace Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System (STARS) System Wide Information Management (SWIM) Terminal Automation Modernization and Replacement (TAMR) Terminal Flight Data Manager (TFDM) Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) Traffic Flow Management (TFM) Uncontrolled Airspace Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) very high frequency Omni-directional Range (VOR) Visual Flight Rules (VFR) Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. Describe how air traffic is controlled. 2. What is the mission of the FAA's air traffic control system? 3. Identify some of the major milestones in air traffic control history. 4. What are some of the key components of the air traffic control system? 5. Discuss the basic differences between visual and instrument flight rules (VFR vs. IFR) . 6. What is the purpose of a terminal radar approach control (TRACON) ? 7. Briefly describe how GPS works. 8. What are some of the advantages of satellite-based navigation? 9. What is automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) ? 10. Distinguish between ADS-B and ASDE-X. 11. What are the key components of the en route/oceanic air traffic control system? 12. What is NextGen and what are its goals? 13. Describe what you believe to be the most important of the NextGen backbone programs and express why you made the choice. 14. Discuss the basic provisions of the new federal aviation administration Unmanned Aircraft Systems Rule (FAR Part 107). Chapter 11 SAFETY DATA In passenger transportation, safety factors (some of which are causal f actors) are events that are associated with or influence fatality rates. A safety indicator is a mea­surable safety factor. The probability of death or injury as a result of traveling in a given transportation mode, when quantified, is the primary benchmark of passenger safety. Car accident rates also are commonly used as safety indicators since most pas­senger fatalities occur as a result of terrestrial vehicle accidents and not aviation ones. If one were to look at risk as the probability of death, then the risk due to traveling can be established from fatality rates. However, commercial aviation fatality rates are poor indicators to show change in short-term risk since a large jet accident can potentially result in the deaths of a few hundred people. Hence, a sin­gle accident can greatly influence fatality rates. Therefore, the trending of fatality rates requires data from extended time periods (5 years or more). As an alternative process, accident rates can be used instead of fatality rates as indicators of safety levels. The number of fatalities, even for a specific type of accident, varies greatly with each crash. However, while the number of accidents may have a narrower range of annual variance than the number of fatalities, it still presents challenges for analyses. While the way that accidents are defined may mean that there are more numbers of accidents than fatalities, modern commercial aviation thankfully presents few accidents making for difficult statistical analyses. Also, the number of accidents in a given country, geographic area, or type of operation can vary signifi­cantly from one year to the next, thus resulting in accident rates also being poor indicators of short-term estimates of risk trends. Before using accident statistics for safety analyses, it is necessary to understand the denominators of exposure used to calculate transportation accident or fatality rates. Exposure data can be thought of as an indication of the amount of oppor­tunity an event has to occur. Cycles, distance, and time for passengers and vehicles are the principal exposure types. They are used in the denominator of rates, such as fatalities per passenger departure or electrical system failures per flight-hour. The choice of type of exposure data will affect how rates are compared between and within transportation modes. We must be careful to only compare rates that have the same units of exposure. For example, it would be highly confusing to compare fatalities per departure in one year to fatalities per flight hour in another year. Passenger-miles (the number of passengers multiplied by the miles traveled) are most appropriate when one is comparing air transportation with other modes of transportation, as they allow generalized, broad-based system comparisons. Using trips between the same city pairs to compare risks for different modes of travel seems appealing at first glance; however, the number of city pairs in the United States is extremely large and some modes of transportation do not have passen­ger data in the format required for this type of comparison. In addition, risk per passenger-mile is not uniform over a trip and can vary by the type of route taken, by season, or the time of day. It is clear that the probability of an accident is significantly higher during take­off or landing given the increased risk in such phases of flight over others such as cruise. Since the cruise phase is usually the longest part of any commercial flight, then most travel time occurs under a lower average risk. Such variation is not present during surface transportations, such as during the daily commute to one's office, although specific locations may pose more driving hazards than others. Aviation accidents can vary greatly in severity, ranging from a flight-attendant back injury from pushing carts during in-flight service or handling overhead luggage to several hundred deaths due to an aircraft crash. To render a more equitable per­spective on aviation risk, some databases categorize accidents as fatal and nonfatal. However, even when using such a process, a single death on a ramp during an aircraft pushback would still be classified as an aviation accident even though the aircraft involved in the accident is untouched. To address this issue, International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) classifies accidents as major, serious, injury, or damage (see definitions in Chapter 1 ) . Another classification popular with insur­ance and aircraft manufacturing industries is to refer to accidents as either an (aircraft} hull loss or non-hull loss. A hull loss is airplane damage that is beyond economic repair, which implies that very serious damage was incurred. Accident counts by themselves cannot be reliably used to measure relative safety among different airlines or flight departments because there are just not enough accidents for statistics to be usable. Most airlines will, thankfully, not have a hull loss in any given year, making comparison based on such criteria meaning­less. Small numbers of accidents, even if including all four accident categories used by the NTSB, may produce a false picture due to highly unpredictable events, such as turbulence encounters. Furthermore, all other considerations being equal, an airline that has a larger fleet of aircraft could be expected (statistically speaking) to have a larger number of accidents than an airline with fewer planes. Similarly, aircraft models that are flown more often would be expected to be involved in more accidents than less frequently used models. For this reason the accident rate, which is the number of accidents divided by some common base variable (e.g., flight hours, departures, and miles flown), is a more valid indicator of relative safety than just accident counts. In this context, time (flight hours) is a popular measure of exposure in many types of risk analysis. Since flight-hour data is needed for economic, operational, and main­tenance reasons, airlines keep accurate records of such data which are readily avail­able for safety rate comparisons. Also, rate data is used by national transportation safety board to compare safety performances among airlines and other sectors of the air transportation industry. Even when comparing rates versus number of accidents, context must be con­sidered in order to perform a fair analysis. For example, weather is often a factor in accidents and some airlines operate primarily in relatively benign weather, such as is often found in the desert southwestern United States or Mediterranean Europe. While others operate in very challenging weather, such as in Canada, Alaska, Scotland, or Scandinavia, where large portions of the year require operating in fro­zen precipitation, contaminated runways, and low ceilings. Another example is the variation in navigation airborne integrated data system and airport conditions faced in different parts of the world. Airlines providing service within Europe may expect radar control and preci­sion approaches to long paved runways, whereas some airlines in South America and Africa routinely operate in non-radar environments to dirt runways in the jungle. As previously mentioned, takeoffs and landings, to include approaches, pres­ent more risk than other phases of flight. This is partly because there is less time to correct undesirable aircraft states or errors before being met with the unforgiving firmness of terrain or fluidity of water. If takeoffs or landings are used as a base for rate calculations, then the airline that predominantly flies several shorter routes but similar number of hours per day would be expected to have a higher accident rate than those flying only a few longer legs. For example, a twin engine turboprop aircraft flying tourists around Alaska may make 10 flights per day and therefore the same amount of takeoffs and landings, whereas a legacy airline's Boeing 787 may make one flight per day. A safety analyst desiring to assess accident rates between two such operators would be wise to use number of landings as a denomi­nator in the accident rate equation versus flight hours in order to produce a more equitable comparison. The air transportation industry is extremely dynamic and changes with technolog­ical advances, operational strategies {point-to-point versus hub and spoke), mergers, consolidations, and bankruptcies that all rapidly change the aviation landscape. The aviation industry of today is very different from what it was 40 years ago. For all these described reasons, one should also exercise care when comparing safety statistics over long periods of time. While there is no clear answer as to what time domain is appropriate for analyzing and comparing aviation safety data, the most recent 5- to 10-year span appears to be the accepted norm among federal regulators. Aviation accidents are rare occurrences, and the risk of death or serious injury by air travel is miniscule. With such small numbers, making statistical inferences from the data to evaluate safety performance of the industry is very difficult. Regulatory agencies and the aviation industry maintain a wide variety of safety­related information. However, one must take into consideration the accuracy and completeness of these data when developing safety trends and recommending control measures. Safety factors other than fatalities or accidents that include the nature and causes of accidents (covered in Chapter 2) should be studied and used for preemptive strikes against safety hazards and to provide timely feedback to safety managers and policymakers. In summary, no single measurement provides the complete safety picture. Passenger-exposure data are used when passenger risk is to be described. Passenger­miles are used when the influence of vehicle size or vehicle speed on the data is nonexistent. Departure-exposure data accounts for nonuniform risk over a trip. Time is the most widely used exposure measure, and time-based data are often readily available. AVIATION ACCIDENT AND SAFETY STATISTICS Chapter 7 reviewed various data reporting systems, both voluntary and mandatory, that are used in aviation. While ensuring compliance or consistency in safety report­ing is difficult in general, voluntary systems have added complexity in that they are inconsistent and less reliable because they are subject to reporting bias and errone­ous content. Such reports can still be highly valuable, of course. There are several reliable sources of accident data. One of the most easily accessible accident data­bases is maintained by Boeing, which publishes an annual Statistical Summary of Commercial Jet Airplane Accidents. Another source is the Aviation Safety Network of the Flight Safety Foundation, found at http://aviation-safety.net/. Finally, the defi­nite source of aircraft accident data in the United States is the national transportation safety board database. MANUFACTURERS' INVOLVEMENT WITH SAFETY DATA Safety professionals within the airframe and engine manufacturer community can often be found at accident sites participating in the investigation due to their unique, equipment-specific knowledge. They collect data and analyze them with their expertise and their extensive network of fellow experts on given systems back at their company. They recommend improvements in the way aircraft are designed, built, operated, and maintained. The goal for all who participate in accident inves­tigations is to learn from the event, and therefore, prevent future accidents. Such prevention is best accomplished when the equipment experts are allowed to yield their unique insights as part of the investigative process. While different manufacturers all participate in the investigative process when their respective equipment is involved, organizations are often organized differently from each other and, consequently, may also approach the investigative process dif­ferently. For example, accident investigation and safety data analysis are separate units at Boeing, while at other manufacturers, they are combined and often linked to customer support in a single organization. The closest thing to a constant among manufacturers' safety departments is their responsibility for accident investigation. When a company's product is involved in an accident, the company has a duty to help find the causes. In the par­lance of the NTSB, the company becomes a party to the investigation, as discussed in Chapter 6. That means the manufacturer's representatives work alongside national transportation safety board investigators in examining evidence at the accident site. The parties conduct sub­sequent tests and suggest findings, but the final analysis and published report are produced by the NTSB. Safety departments with manufacturing companies scrutinize incidents as well as accidents. Committees are formed to represent various departments using new safety management systems (SMS) procedures. Doing so is part of the overall evolution from reactive safety to proactive safety, as discussed in Chapter 7, and as part of the safety management system framework presented in Chapter 12. Based on the events reviewed, the committees recommend design changes or revisions in maintenance or operating procedures. Accident reports produce a lot of data, but the lack of frequency of accidents compared to the frequency of incidents means that still more data come from incident reports and other report files com­piled by airlines, manufacturers, and government agencies. The FAA, for example, records Service Difficulty Reports. Manufacturers' safety departments have come to view these reports as a resource to be developed and cultivated. The data come from a variety of sources. Manufacturers' service representatives around the world report regularly on anomalous events both large and small. Airlines often report issues directly to manufacturers for both prompt, reme­dial action input and overall tracking of discrepancies for any given part or system. Other data sources include civil authorities and international organizations such as the International Air Transport Association, the U.K. CAA, and U.S. FAA, as well as insurance underwriters and publications. Even with all those collection efforts, safety staff do not claim that a record of every event unfailingly finds its way to the appropriate database. When little or no damage is involved, airlines sometimes make no external reports due to the very high tempo of technical operations and the never ending list of repairs and inspections that demand constant attention. While manufacturers of large airframes maintain what probably are the most extensive databases, other manufacturers also are collecting such information. Makers of engines and other components are also in the business of collecting sta­tistical data. The purpose of gathering the data is trend analysis. Computers may be able to discern patterns that a human analyst may miss. Boeing has taken a proactive stance in the area of safety. Manufacturers can alert carriers to problems they did not know they had. A team assembled by Boeing uses accident records and other data to identify current safety issues. For example, Boeing was a leading proponent in stressing the importance of installing ground proximity warning system (GPWS) and the need for proper training in its use. Similarly, to prevent approach and landing accidents, Boeing has urged that every runway used by commercial transports be equipped with an instru­ment landing system (ILS) and several training measures have been advocated for pilots and controllers to alleviate the dangers associated with nonstabilized approaches. Boeing research also has addressed crew-caused accidents. Its data and other sources identify flight crew error as the primary cause in close to 70% of com­mercial jet hull-loss accidents (see the next section "Boeing's Accident Statistical Summary"). However, accidents rarely have a single cause. Manufacturers' preven­tion strategies address all the factors, not just the primary one. Removing even one link in the chain of events can prevent many accidents. Airlines maintain databases and conduct trend analyses of their own. These analyses can benefit from work done by the manufacturers. For example, American Airlines studied a series of Boeing 7 57 tail strikes. After assessing its own records, the carrier checked with Boeing about the experiences of other operators of the same type of aircraft. Once the problem was identified, American Airlines and Boeing worked to solve it by revising training methods. The large airframe manufacturers also publish annual reports that are compila­tions of industry-wide accident data. It should also be noted that, for day-to-day problem-solving, airlines usually have more contact with a manufacturer's accident and incident investigators than with the analysts behind the data. In the discussions that follow, databases from Boeing, the Flight Safety Foundation, and the national transportation safety board will be explored to analyze aviation accident statistics. BoEING's AcciDENT STATISTICAL SuMMARY According to the Boeing's accident statistical summary, in the 50 years plus, world­wide history of scheduled commercial jet operations ( 1959 to 2015), there have been 1,918 accidents resulting in 29,646 onboard fatalities and 1,216 external fatalities. Of the 1,918 accidents, 619 produced fatal and 973 resulted in hull losses. If one were to consider accidents by type of operation, 80% ( 1 ,525) of the 1 ,9 1 8 accidents were passenger operations, 14% (269) were cargo operations, and the remaining 6% ( 124) occurred during testing, training, demonstration, or ferrying. U.S. and Canadian operations collectively incurred about 30% (571 ) of the 1,9 1 8 worldwide accidents, contributing to about 2 1 % (6,202) of the 29,646 global onboard fatalities. Over this period, there have been in excess of 713 million cumulative departures and more than 1,321 million cumulative flight hours. The industry is now operating 24,61 1 jet aircraft, with little over 27 million departures each year. If we examine a plot of all accidents for the worldwide commercial jet fleet for the period 1959 to 2015, as shown in Figure 1 1-1, we can see that the rates for all accidents and those involving hull losses appear fairly stable for the past 40 years. Closer inspection, though, reveals a steady and continuous decrease until reaching an asymptotic state in the past two decades. However, even if this low accident rate remains constant over the next few years, we can expect to see an increase in the actual number of hull-loss accidents each year as the fleet increases in number of departures. Hull losses and fatal accidents were also analyzed according to the phase of flight in which they occurred (Figure 1 1-2). The combined final approach-and­landing phases accounted for 49 % of the hull-loss and fatal accidents, followed by the combined phases from loading through initial climb (23 % ) . Cruise, which accounts for about 57% of flight time in a 1.5-hour flight, occasioned only 12% of hull-loss accidents. In past years and in the previous editions of this book, the summary also considered primary causal factors for commercial operation hull-loss accidents. Classifications occurred for primary causes as attributed to flight crew, airplane, weather, maintenance, airport/ATC, or miscellaneous/other. However, Boeing has recently stopped reporting this data in adherence with emergence philosophies described earlier in this book about the risks of such monocausal assignments. Finally, fatalities by accident categories were covered for the period 1960 to 2015 (Figure 11-3 ). Loss of control in flight accounted for 1,396 onboard fatalities, followed by runway excursions, which had 632 onboard fatalities and 35 external fatalities during the recent 15-year period. The three figures (Figures 11-1, 11-2, and 11-3) can be used as a launching platform for countless discussions about accident measurement, accident causes, and accident outcomes in terms of severity. For example, Figure 11-1 prompts thoughts about how different initiatives over the past century of flight have been used as links in the commercial aviation safety value chain. This includes the advent of jet engines with high mechanical reliability, the use of flight simulators in pilot training, and different maintenance inspection techniques that catch incipient problems before they become catastrophic. Similarly, Figure 11-2 can elicit a spirited discussion about the role played by aircraft status in the severity of outcomes as a function of the phase of flight when an event occurs. An additional area for discussion is that of exposure to different internal and external threats to the operation of aircraft. Lastly, Figure 1 1-3 prompts the reader to ask whether the relative distribution of accident categories has remained fixed or has changed over time. The same dis­cussion can be projected into the future by exploring how the relative distributions may change with increased reliance on automation in both flight deck operations and external safety systems such as those found in airfield operations and air traffic control. These three figures are representative of the whole report and of the even larger use of data and statistics for managing safety. As such, it is evident that their use helps prompt questions and analyses that shed light on different issues in safety and assist with evidence-based decision making by government officials, airline managers, and manufacturers. It should be noted that Boeing's accident data exclude turboprop aircraft as well as those with maximum gross weights of 60,000 lb (27,21 6 kg) or less; Soviet Union and Commonwealth of Independent States accidents; and accidents resulting from sabotage, hijacking, suicide, and military action. Although it is not an exhaus­tive compilation of data, and therefore only offers a partial statistical analysis, the content still proves highly useful for determining safety initiatives. Based largely on data such as these, it has become increasingly apparent that the largest challenge facing airline safety management continues to be human error. This recognition is not new. In 1974, the Flight Safety Foundation held its 28th Annual International Aviation Safety Seminar in Williamsburg, VA. The theme was human factors in flight operations, and it is believed that this seminar was the first major airline industry safety conference devoted to human error. In 1975, International Air Transport Association (lATA) sponsored its 20th Technical Conference: Safety in Flight Operations. The conference proceedings were almost exclusively focused on human factors and human-error issues, which were termed "the last frontier of aviation safety." These early industry efforts were at the van­guard of present-day approaches to the problem of management and control of human error in aviation operations. The University of Texas' Human Factors Research Project conducted avia­tion safety research funded by the federal aviation administration and industry for over 25 years. More recently, a current safety initiative of the Flight Safety Foundation is a project entitled "Operators Guide to Human Factors in Aviation" and contains an extensive compendium of Human Factors information on their Web site (flightsafety.org) . The Flight Safety Foundation, in conjunction with AIRBUS, established an annual Human Factors in Aviation Safety Award which is presented at the FSF European Aviation Safety Seminar. Likewise, lATA and international civil aviation organization are very active in Human Factors training on an international basis. The subject of Human Factors has been thor­oughly explored earlier in Chapters 3 and 4 of this textbook. UNITED STATES' STATISTICS For the United States, the primary source of accident data is the NTSB. Because of the NTSB's very broad definition of an accident, the United States experiences an average of close to 36 accidents involving scheduled and nonscheduled air service each year. However, serious accidents, those involving fatalities, are much rarer. The NTSB's official compilation of accident statistics from 1995 to 2014 for Part 121 scheduled and nonscheduled airline service provides excellent insights into the state of modern commercial aviation safety in the United States. In that transportation segment, the country averages 20 to 50 accidents per year of which only 0 to 6 accidents are fatal accidents with 0 to 525 onboard fatalities per year. Such numbers do not mean much unless a rate can be derived by comparing them to flight time or departures as a measure of exposure. The national transportation safety board also calculates that in a year period there are between 1 3 and 20 million flight hours and between 8 and 1 1 million departures. Therefore, the accident rate can be calculated as being between 0. 1 7 and 0.3 accidents per 100,000 flight hours and between 0.06 and 0.036 fatal accidents per 1 00,000 flight hours. When using departures as the denominator to calculate the rates, the national transportation safety board num­bers show that between 0.248 and 0.52 accidents occurred for each 100,000 depar­tures and between 0.009 and 0.061 fatal accidents occurred per 100,000 departures. The difference in numerators is because not all accidents involve fatalities. Although such numbers are still not acceptable to the traveling public and to those affected by the tragedies represented by each fatal accident, the overall picture for commercial aviation safety is quite positive. It should be noted that the September 2001 terrorist attacks are excluded from this analysis since they were intentional acts that fall under the domain of security, and therefore, are not safety-related. As a form of comparison to other transportation modes, the national transportation safety board Web site also provided preliminary estimates of measurements for fatalities in 2013 associated with highway (cars, trucks, motorcycles, etc.), marine (ships), and rail (trains) modes. The year 2013 was the most current year for such an inter-modal comparison. In aviation there were 443 fatalities that year, of which only 9 were associated with the airlines and 6 with commuter categories. The vast majority of aviation fatalities, 387, were associated with general aviation. By comparison there were 615 marine fatalities that same year and 891 rail fatalities. As one might expect, the number for highway fatali­ties is startlingly higher at 32,719 for that same year. Granted, the reader should be cautious when comparing between statistics that are bereft of exposure data. For such a purpose we can reference the statistical analysis performed by the Airlines for America, which is an American trade association and lobbying group that represents the largest airlines and which is based in Washington, D.C. The anal­ysis draws on other sources of data, such as those from the National Safety Council, the American Public Transit Association, the Federal Railroad Administration, and the NTSB. The analysis depicts the big picture by stating that overall about 2 out of every 10 unintentional injury-related deaths occur in passenger transportation. Unintentional deaths exclude suicide and homicide. However, the risk of passenger death, as expressed on a per 100 million passenger mile basis for travel from 2010 to 2012, is 0.49 for light duty vehicles (e.g., cars, SUVs, light trucks, and vans), 0.05 for buses, 0.02 for trains, and 0 for airlines. In fact, from 2010 through 2015, there were zero fatal accidents for U.S. airlines. Thus, it can be said with confidence that commercial aviation is the safest mode of transportation in the United States. GLOBAL STATISTICS On an international scale, statistics are available from both governmental and private sources. On the government side, every year international civil aviation organization publishes a readily accessible and very detailed safety report that depicts accident statistics and con­comitant analyses. The latest such report, published in 2016 and containing data through 2015, shows an ongoing, year-over-year improvement in both the number of accidents as well as the accident rate. The global accident rate involving sched­uled commercial operations dropped by 7% from 3 to 2.8 accidents per million departures from 2014 to 2015, and, indeed, the number of fatal accidents in 2015 was down to 6, representing the lowest number in the past 5 years. Also, the 474 fatalities in 201 5 were a significant decrease from the 904 fatalities in 2014. On the private side, lATA is a trade association for the world's airlines, comprising 268 airlines from 1 1 7 countries. According to lATA, in 2015 there were 37.6 million flights and approximately 3.5 billion passengers. Despite the high volume of flights, only 68 commercial airline accidents occurred. Of these 68 accidents, only 4 resulted in passenger fatalities. It is important to note here that Germanwings Flight 9525 and Metrojet Flight 9268 were not included in the data since they were classified as deliberate acts of unlawful interference. The 2015 figure represents a decline from the 77 accidents in 2014. More good news is that during the 5-year period from 2010 to 2014, the average rate of accidents per year was 90. From this, we can see that the long-term trend indicates that flying is continuing to get safer. The lATA numbers represent a different way of measur­ing the same aspects of safety as those of ICAO. Both approaches show continued improvement and that commercial aviation is overall a very safe mode of transport. OCCUPATIONAL ACCIDENT STATISTICS-DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS (BLS) Commercial aviation safety also requires protecting the very large portion of the workforce that falls outside of flight crews, such as the ramp agents, airfield man­agers, aviation maintenance technicians, dispatchers, and air traffic controllers, from harm. The death toll trend due to occupational injuries has been on the decline over the past decades because of new technology, stricter safety regulations, and a shift in the economy toward safer service-industry jobs. The Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries program reported that the number of fatal work injuries in the United States in 2014 was 4,821, slightly up from 4,585 in 2013. Even though there has been variability in this figure over the past 10 years, there is no signifi­cant trend to indicate if workplace fatalities are up or down for the 5- to 10-year window that we like to use for analyzing and comparing aviation safety data. Overall though, the transportation industry still suffers from the most work-related fatalities than any other sector. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) still remains the authoritative source for nonfatal occupational (work-related) illnesses and injuries in the United States. The BLS, in cooperation with occupational safety and health administration and the state government agencies in the United States, uses scientifically developed sampling surveys to collect data on nonfa­tal injuries and illnesses. All deaths are reported directly to OSHA. The surveys exclude the self-employed farms with fewer than 1 1 employees, private households, federal government agencies, and employees in state and local governments. The results are published in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual, which was first developed and published in 1987. Information in the second in command Manual is pub­lished by industry type. Major groups are further divided into industry groups with each industry group having second in command codes within it. NoRTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS) Developed in cooperation with Canada and Mexico, the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) represents a profound change in government statistical reporting programs. NAICS uses a six-digit coding system to clas­sify all economic activity into 20 service sectors. For example, the category of " Scheduled Air Transportation" is broken down into two codes as follows: 481111 , " Scheduled Passenger Air Transportation," and 481112, " Scheduled Freight Air Transportation." The NAICS has been adopted to soon replace the Department of Labor's second in command coding system, thus providing a new statistical tool in the area of occupational accident statistics. The BLS Injuries, Illness, and Facilities program provides annual information on the rate and number of work-related injuries, illnesses, and fatal injuries, and how these statistics vary by incident, industry, geography, occupation, and other characteristics. In recent years, the number of work-related fatalities, injuries, and illnesses has steadily decreased in the Air Transportation subsector, NAICS category 481 . For example, the number of fatalities in this subsector decreased from 38 in 2008 to 28 in 2009, which represents a significant reduction. Similarly, the rate of injury and illness cases fell for the category of total recordable cases. This includes incidents that involve days away from work and days of job transfer or restriction. However, when compared with general industry injury and illness trends, the air transporta­tion rates are 8.5 total recordable cases per 100 full-time workers, which is nearly twice the national injury average. While general industry injury and illness trends have been at their lowest level in years, the air transportation sector could still use some significant improvement. Like many collected data, the NAICS/BLS statistics have some limitations. As with most surveys, the data are subject to sampling error. There are also other sources of error, such as the inability to obtain information about all cases in the sample, mistakes in coding or recording data, and difficulties reaching agreement on certain definitions that define data to be used for analyses. Furthermore, since these statistics provide an estimate of workplace injuries and illnesses based on logs kept by employers during the year, the collection process is only as good as the employers' understanding of which cases are work-related under OSHA's recordkeeping guidelines. Finally, the number of injuries and illnesses that get reported can be influenced by the level of economic activity, working condi­tions, work practices, worker experience and training, and the number of hours worked. CONCLUSION In his autobiography, Mark Twain references the following quote: "there are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies and statistics." This saying goes on to show how peo­ple often use numbers to strengthen their arguments at the risk of misrepresenting meaning if not used carefully. In aviation, statistics are used to measure safety and to provide evidence to justify safety recommendations. The range of safety issues present in aviation includes minor sprains and injuries all the way to major cata­strophic accidents. Therefore, we cannot rely solely on one calculation to accurately paint the picture of the safety landscape. Instead, we must put everything together, whether it is data from the NTSB, lATA, manufacturers, BLS, or OSHA, to get a holistic view of the safety scene. Although no single measure can indicate the overall status of safety in an orga­nization, individual statistics by themselves are still helpful for determining smaller aspects of safety. They can assist us in identifying weak links in the commercial aviation safety value chain. Ultimately though, the goal is to continue to reduce the number of fatal accidents per year, and we can do this by crafting a variety of mea­sures in response to properly collected and analyzed safety data. KEY TERMS Accident Rate Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Crew-Caused Accidents Exposure Data Hull Loss Major, Serious, Injury, or Damage Accident North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Probability Safety Factors Safety Indicator Service Difficulty Reports Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. Why is the accident rate a better measure of safety than accident counts ? 2. Discuss some of the issues associated with analyzing and comparing commercial aviation accident statistics. 3. Explain why aviation safety statistics are calculated differently than ones for other modes of transportation. 4. Why is it important to open and sustain a dialogue about safety statistics among all players in the aviation industry? 5. How does trend analysis contribute to analyzing safety? 6. What are some lessons that can be learned from the Boeing summary? 7. Explain how occupational safety and health administration injury and illness rates are calculated. 8. What are second in command and NAICS codes and how are they used? 9. How do occupational safety and health administration injury and illness rates relate to the safety of aviation's operat­ing environment? Chapter 12 MANAGING SAFETY INTRODUCTION Safety Management Systems (SMS) is a term describing a standardized approach to controlling risk across an entire organization that promotes the sharing of safety data and best practices. safety management system requires crafting policy, methodically calculating and controlling risk, measuring how everything is working, and communicating it all to employees. A commercial airline, like any other major business, has to integrate and manage a complex array of tasks to deliver products and services to the cus­tomer. Safety must be built into every aspect as an integral part of every employee's job responsibility. After all, safety is a team effort. This book has repeatedly used the expression of a safety value chain to describe how every employee and technol­ogy are links in the chain, and chains are only as strong as the weakest link. The airline industry has always placed great emphasis on safety and has moved aggres­sively to identify and control problems that cause accidents. Airlines have learned, sometimes the hard way, that active management of risk is an absolute requirement for a healthy company. Even though the management of safety is not a new concept, it was not until the 1990s that safety professionals started seriously asking the rather profound question of whether they were managing safety at peak efficiency. This introspec­tive question may have been prompted by recognition of the safety professional's role in an organization, by increased public awareness that advances in scientific and business principles can be applied to management for making any operation more efficient, and that safety is a state that requires management. It was probably the convergence of those lines of thinking, combined with the traveling public's increasing intolerance of inefficiency, which led to the birth of a standardized approach to minimizing risk, which today we call Safety Management Systems (SMS). Although safety management as a practice has existed since the birth of aviation, in one way or another, safety management system is a formal and standardized frame­work of best practices for running a safety program based around sophisticated business and scientific processes. Those processes are not just used to create safety, but also used to monitor the health and effectiveness of a safety program so that it operates at peak performance. A key component of the architecture mirrors the business world's use of performance indicators. In SMS, these are called safety per­formance indicators. An ideal airline safety management system would have unlimited resources to manage the safety demands of the business. If that were the case, the management of safety would not be that difficult. However, since commercial aviation is in the business of mak­ing profit and any investment in safety requires people, time, and money, limited resources force airlines to choose wisely about how to allocate their funds. Safety efficiency, therefore, is not just about making risk management more streamlined and effective, but also about saving money by operating a safety program as lean as possible without seeing significant safety issues arise. Safety and efficiency of airline services should never be in competition, rather they should be in balance during management's decision-making process. Although safety is a major function and should permeate through all departments, it is not the main objective of the commercial airline industry. Ultimately, an airline's pri­mary goal, as with any business, is profit. Airlines sell a promise to get passengers from one destination to the next. Although safety contributes to fulfilling this promise, so do monetary factors such as punctuality, cost-effectiveness, and pre­dictability. The dichotomy between safety and profit can be perceived as being in conflict because safety can be very expensive. The champions of safety see their expenditures as investments to prevent future catastrophes and often say, "Safety may be expensive, but not nearly as expensive as the lack of safety." A company's managers may sometimes be tempted to put production ahead of protection, and profit at the expense of safety, with occasional disastrous consequences. Therefore, many safety managers are sophisticated enough to avoid the logical error of refer­ring to "safety as the top priority," but instead refer to the need for safety as an enduring job requirement that accompanies all priorities. An organization's corporate culture must emphasize safety jointly with profit, controlling risk as a core value to help the bottom line, not to hinder profit. The best approach is a balanced allocation of resources where safety management is a core business function, closely intertwined with business objectives and not in competition with the profit aspects of the business. As shown in Figure 12-1, safety and profit should be perceived as inseparable, since an unsafe commercial opera­tion will soon cease to be used by customers. Curiously, the picture depicts passengers with seatbelts unfastened, which further highlights the need for a company to enforce passengpassenger safety requirements. This is one example of how enforcement of safety standards is vital to prevent personal injury. In many chapters of this book, the reader has already been introduced to aviation safety management system concepts. This chapter will bring together many of the previously dis­cussed ideas as we formally introduce and explain the framework of SMS. We will discuss the history of safety management system principles, the fundamental concepts, the tools and tech­niques used by aviation safety professionals, and the future of safety management system in commercial aviation safety. EVOLUTION OF safety management system It is clear that modern safety principles have significantly evolved in the years following World War II. Following the war, commercial aviation saw significant growth and so did the enabling technology with the introduction of the B-47, the jet engine, and swept back wing configuration. This technical era of aviation safety concentrated on the improvement of technical factors during the decades of the 1950s and 1960s. In the 1970s, the Japanese gained world market share in the electronics and automobile industry using the "Total Quality Management" (TQM) concepts of quality experts, W. Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran, among others. This move­ment in Japan focused on improving the quality of manufactured products through teamwork and employee involvement. In the aviation world, the focus shifted to the human era by using such tools as Crew Resource Management ( CRM) and Line-Oriented Flight Training (LOFT). As outlined by international civil aviation organization in the Safety Management Manual, the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s has been called the golden era of aviation human factors. In the early 1 990s, aviation safety thinking shifted its focus to the organi­zational era, where safety was viewed from a system perspective which included technical, human, and organizational factors. As previously discussed, Dr. James Reason's so-called Swiss Cheese Model introduced the concept of the "organizational accident," which is a breakdown of organizational processes resulting in an accident. Using quality-based employee involvement and cultural empowerment concepts employed by the Japanese and adopted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), aviation safety management system theory has evolved into a worldwide movement which pays great safety dividends. It should not surprise the reader that safety management system is closely tied to business efficiency concepts. After all, an accident is the ulti­mate expression of an inefficient process. Figure 12-2 illustrates the evolution of safety thinking from the technical era, into the human era, and now including the recent organizational era focus. As previously discussed in Chapter 5, international civil aviation organization is the United Nations organization that issues international standards related to worldwide aviation. Since its founda­tion in 1944 at the Chicago Convention, international civil aviation organization has been in the forefront of airline safety matters, and its member States ( 191 countries) have agreed to abide by the international civil aviation organization annexes known as Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs). Annex 6 to the Chicago Convention deals with International Commercial Air Transport. Amendment 33 of Annex 6 sets the stage for international awareness and implementation of safety management system by the world's airlines. It provides that international civil aviation organization member States shall require its operators to implement an safety management system that as a minimum: • Identifies safety hazards. • Ensures that remedial action necessary to maintain an acceptable level of safety is implemented. • Provides for continuous monitoring and regular assessment of the safety level achieved. • Aims to make continuous improvement to the overall level of safety in the United States. Safety Management System concepts began to influence government safety profoundly about 1 0 years ago in the United States. Early discussions made it clear that safety management system would have to be adopted by both the regulator as well as the regulated and that there needed to be transparency for programs to succeed. This included a collaborative effort between the airline industry and the federal aviation administration to share data, analyze risk, and develop a plan of action for moving forward. Stolzer and Goglia (2015) tracked the timeline for safety management system implementation in the United States. It was not until 2006 that international civil aviation organization established an amendment to Annex 6 which made it a requirement for international civil aviation organization members to develop and implement an SMS. At this time, the federal aviation administration began gearing up for the new requirement by developing an aviation rulemaking committee, piloting voluntary pilot projects, and creating informa­tional material. The efforts targeted air carriers, repair stations, design and manu­facturing firms, and airports. The objectives of the FAA's safety management system pilot projects were threefold: 1. Develop safety management system implementation strategies 2. Develop federal aviation administration oversight interfaces 3. Gain safety management system experience for federal aviation administration and service providers Major U.S. airlines started participating in these voluntary programs, as safety management system implementation was also underway in the international airline community. The crash of Colgan Air Flight 3407 near Buffalo, New York, on February 12, 2009 had a profound effect on commercial airline safety. By federal aviation administration Order 1 1 10.152, the federal aviation administration established the safety management system Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC), which was chartered to provide recommendations to the federal aviation administration on the development and imple­mentation of safety management system regulations and guidance. Essentially, the safety management system airworthiness review certificate recommended a detailed blueprint following international civil aviation organization international guidelines. The airworthiness review certificate recommended federal aviation administration safety management system regulations and guid­ance be closely aligned and consistent with the same international civil aviation organization safety management system framework of the 4 components and 12 elements discussed throughout this chapter. In the wake of the Colgan crash, the U.S. Congress passed Public Law 111-216 which originally required a final federal aviation administration safety management system airline rule by August 1 , 2012. This requirement for all Part 121 air carriers in the United States was the first time that the federal aviation administration mandated the implementation of an safety management system program. The final U.S. version of safety management system is based upon the international civil aviation organization system and exhibits fundamental characteristics as recommended by the ARC. The features of the final rule regarding FAR Part 121 safety management system include the following: • Alignment with international civil aviation organization safety management system framework and international acceptability. • Phrased promulgation of regulations and implementation of safety management system requirements by FAA. • Scalability and flexibility of the regulations to accommodate a broad range of organizations. • safety management system processes should not change existing regulatory standards for FAR Part 121. • Consistent with Public Law 1 1 1-2 1 6, the federal aviation administration recognition and implementa­tion of existing voluntary safety systems as part of the airline's safety management system such as the following: • Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) • Flight Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA) Program • Line Operations Safety Audit (LOSA) • Advanced Qualification Program (AQP) In January 2015, a revised safety management system Advisory Circular ( 120-92B) was published by the federal aviation administration which contains important information pertaining to all aviation sectors. The final airline safety management system rule ( 1 4 code of federal regulations Part 5) requires airline operators authorized to conduct operations under Part 121 to develop and implement an safety management system within 3 years. By March 9, 201 8, all U.S. Part 121 air carriers must have an safety management system that meets 14 code of federal regulations Part 5 requirements. The corresponding safety management system rule for Airports is in its final stages and should be released in the near future. international civil aviation organization ANNEX 19: CONSOLIDATION OF safety management system STANDARDS In view of the increasing complexity and tighter interdependence among various aviation sectors, international civil aviation organization decided to consolidate all safety management system standards into a new annex which allows a higher degree of integration of safety management functions. Annex 19 is the first, new international civil aviation organization Annex in over 30 years and was developed in two phases. The first phase involved the organizing of existing safety manage­ment-related content, modifications to improve the language for clarity, and modifications to ensure standardization and harmonization of safety management system information across the international civil aviation organization Annexes. It was adopted by the international civil aviation organization Council on February 25, 2013 and became applicable in November 2013. Recently a second phase resulted in Amendment 1 to Annex 19. It raises the components of safety management system to the "Standard" level and also addresses the protection of safety data and information. This newly adopted Amendment to Annex 19 was effective in July 201 6 and will become fully applicable in November 2019. STRUCTURE OF SMS: FOUR COMPONENTS (PILLARS OF SMS) In order to simplify and organize the best practices of managing safety, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the United States chose to formulate four large­scale components under which to organize concepts. Other countries follow a similar structure although some aviation organizations have different organizing plans. Regardless of safety management system structures, the philosophies that guide the systems are all similar. safety management system is as an organized approach to controlling risk from unintentional damage or harm, including the necessary organizational structures, accountabili­ties, policies, and procedures. In the United States the safety management system framework consists of 4 components (also known as pillars), and 12 elements within those components. The federal aviation administration provides guidance on these components as they are keys to implementing SMS. The four components of safety management system are as follows: 1. Safety policy. Establishes senior management's commitment to improve safety continually; defines the methods, processes, and organizational structure needed to meet safety goals. This can be remembered via the expression document it in writing, referring to the need to have key aspects of a given safety management system readily avail­able to employees as a written reference. 2. Safety Risk Management (SRM). Determines the need for, and adequacy of, new or revised risk controls based on the assessment of acceptable risk. This can be remembered via the expression hunt the hazards, then assess and mitigate the risks, referring to the fundamental need of having employees aggressively seek safety problems and having a means of effecting change to produce better conditions. 3. Safety Assurance (SA). Evaluates the continued effectiveness of implemented risk control strategies, and supports the identification of new hazards. This can be remembered via the expression measure and improve it, referring to the need to use scientific principles to determine the effectiveness of the actual management change processes being used. 4. Safety Promotion. Includes training, communication, and other actions to create a positive safety culture within all levels of the workforce. This can be remem­bered via the expression learn it and share it, referring to the need to continu­ously learn about the SMS, about new and old hazards, and disseminating such life-saving information to all employees who can affect safety. The FAA's approach to organizing safety management system by placing concepts into four compo­nents is illustrated in Figure 12-3 . Note how the promotion component is shown to impact all three other components. COMPONENT #1: SAFETY POLICY Safety policy encompasses the leadership of the Accountable Executive to provide clear safety objectives, methods, processes, and the organizational structure needed to meet safety goals. Safety promotion refers to the nonpunitive, positive safety cul­ture (also known as a "Just Culture" ) which empowers all employees to have a role in safety. This is accomplished through comprehensive safety management system training, communica­tion, and awareness techniques. It is appropriate that this element is placed first on the list since it sets the stage for the other elements to exist and reach full potential. The starting point for safety management system Policy is identifying the "Accountable Executive" (AE), who is a single, identifiable person having final responsibility for the organization's SMS, including decisions regarding operations and everything that supports operations. The federal aviation administration has pro­duced several flowcharts to help organizations determine who fills this important position. For purposes of this chapter, the reader can assume that the AE of a large airline will be the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), and of a small commercial avia­tion operation, the AE may be the owner. That AE must then oversee how his or her "organization defines safety policy in accordance with international and national requirements and will sign the overall policy. It should reflect the organization's commitment to safety, should include a clear statement about the provision of the necessary resources for the implementation of the safety policy, and should be communicated throughout the organization." Identifying precisely who that AE is becomes critical because senior management is in control of the safe and efficient operations of the avia­tion organization. It is through management that employees are hired, trained, and dismissed when necessary. The safety policy should be developed by senior management and clearly communicated to all employees. It is extremely important that leadership be strong, demonstrable, and visible if the airline's safety management system program is to succeed. Safety policy should also make clear that safety is the responsibility of all members of management, not just the safety department. The policy should clearly lay out who the safety manager is and how the company's safety management system shall be admin­istered so that responsibility is widely distributed for safety. This will often take shape by using a Safety Action Group (SAG) and Safety Review Board (SRB) to assist management officials in accomplishing safety responsibilities. Under normal circumstances, the safety manager communicates to the AE through either the SAG or the SRB. The SRB is a very high level strategic direction group chaired by the AE, which includes senior line functional managers. Once strategic direction has been developed by the SRB, the members of the SAG are tasked with implement­ing the decisions at a tactical level. In this typical safety management system organization, the Safety Manager serves as the secretary of the SAG to record its actions and keep score of corrective actions taken. Safety policy should also ensure that an Emergency Response Plan (ERP) allows for a smooth transition from normal everyday processes to emergency operations and then back to normal conditions once the emergency has been man­aged. Airlines prepare an ERP document in writing to describe what actions should be taken following an accident and who is responsible for taking each action. An annual emergency response drill is usually required to ensure that the plan is ade­quate and that designated personnel are appropriately trained. Lastly, careful documentation is an essential element of an safety management system organiza­tion. Each AE should ensure that the safety manager has an safety management system implementation plan that provides objectives, processes, and procedures and communicates who is accountable for what aspect of the plan. There also should be a manual that explains the whole safety management system so that any employee can understand the operation. COMPONENT #2: SAFETY RISK MANAGEMENT The heart of any safety management system organization is the interrelationship between safety risk management and safety assurance. Basically, the safety risk management pro­cess provides for the identification of hazards and assessment of risk. Once it is assessed, risk should be controlled (mitigated) to a level as low as reasonably prac­ticable (ALARP). At this point, the safety assurance process takes over to assure that the risk controls are effective using system safety and quality management concepts of monitoring and measurement. Before a risk can be managed, a potential hazardous condition must be identi­fied. It is easy to confuse the concepts of hazard or risk. A hazard is "a condition or activity with the potential to cause death, injuries to personnel, damage to equipment or structures, loss of material, harm to the environment or reduction of the ability to perform a prescribed function" (Source: international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual, 3rd ed., Section 2.1 3.2). An example of a hazard is a leak in the hydraulic line of an aircraft braking system, but because it is not a risk in and of itself, the leak does not let us know how it impacts safety. A risk is the assessment, expressed in terms of predicted probability and sever­ity, of the consequences of a hazard taking as reference the worst credible effect. Thus, risk can be expressed in a formula as: R = P X S, where • R is the expected risk (loss) per unit of time or activity • P is the probability that a given hazard may materialize (likelihood of a loss event per unit of time or activity) • S is the severity of consequences (effects) that the materialized hazard can gener­ ate (loss per event) So, returning to the previous example: • A leak in the hydraulic line of an aircraft braking system is a hazard. • The potential for running off the runway because the pilot might not be able to stop the aircraft on landing using brakes is one of the consequences of the haz­ard; however, • The assessment of the consequences of literally running off the runway expressed in terms of probability (P) and severity (S) is the safety risk (R). Stated another way for clarification, in the equation R = P x S: • P is the probability that the aircraft would run off the runway given that its stopping capability is impaired. • S is the severity of the above event which could vary from no aircraft damage or injuries (near miss) to total destruction, or both (depending on variables such as the aircraft speed and runway remaining when the braking fault is noticed, availability of other means of stopping, etc.). Now that you can differentiate between a hazard and risk, it will make under­standing the importance of the elements in the second component, safety risk man­agement, easier. Analyzing a large volume of safety data from flight operations and determining risks are only one part of the equation. The information we gather is an integral component in creating, implementing, and validating the effectiveness of risk mitigation in an SMS. For this reason, the second component of safety management system incor­porates both hazard identification and risk assessment mitigation. Safety risk management begins with a clear understanding of an organization's functional systems, which are analyzed by experienced operational and technical personnel to detect the presence of hazards. Under SMS, each organization should create and maintain a formal process that ensures that operational hazards are identified. Such a process should be based on a combination of reactive, proactive, and predictive methods of safety data collection. How hazards are identified will depend on the resources, culture, and complexity of the organization. After the safety hazards have been identified, they must be analyzed to determine their consequences to the organization. This step entails creating and maintammg a formal process that ensures analysis, assessment, and control of the safety risks in operations. The conventional method to analyze risk is to break it into two components, the probability of occurrence and the severity of the event should it occur, as previously described. Typically, one tool often used is called a "risk tolerability matrix," which visually displays a risk to determine if it is unacceptable or needs further mitigation to reach the as low as reasonably possible or acceptable region. international civil aviation organization illustrates this risk tolerability as an inverted triangle as shown in Figure 12-4. Note the coding of the risk matrix: Dark gray-unacceptable risk (intolerable) White-acceptable with mitigation (tolerable) Light gray-acceptable region To conduct a safety risk assessment, it is very helpful to plot it visually to clearly see the relationship between severity of consequences and likelihood of occurrence. The classic ICAO/FAA example of using a chart is provided in Figure 12-5. Safety Management System processes that use such a risk matrix require the development of criteria that explain each classification of severity and likelihood appropriate for the organization's type of operations and their operational scenar­ios. For example, one organization operating smaller and less complex equipment may depict severity in terms of the dollar value of potential damage that is quite different from another organization utilizing very expensive equipment. Such risk assessments are often a combination of professional experience and expert judg­ment, including input from data collection tools. The purpose of risk mitigation is to control hazards by either eliminating them altogether or by reducing the severity or likelihood of the hazard to an acceptable level. We must look for the "weak signals," which are early indicators of problems that many may not perceive as a danger. The order of precedence (hierarchy) for these controls is well established, and they are listed below in rank order from most effective to least effective (Stalzer & Goglia, 2015, p. 171): 1. Elimination of the hazard. The most effective is the engineering control strategy which eliminates the safety risk completely. An example would be providing interlocks to prevent thrust reverser activation in flight. Since this is a firm con­trol solution, it is sometimes known as a "hard" control strategy. 2. Reduction of the hazard level. Reduction of the probability or severity of the event reduces its overall impact, perhaps moving its classification from unac­ceptable to acceptable on the risk assessment matrix. For example, the probabil­ity of a ramp agent being hit by a baggage cart tug can be reduced by requiring ramp personnel to wear reflective vests and the severity of being hit by a tug can be reduced by limiting the driving speed of tugs. 3. Employment of safety devices. This control method is mechanical in nature (safety guards, rails, etc.) and often prevents exposure to potential hazards. 4. Warnings and alert methods. These could be visual (warning light) or audible, such as an aircraft stall or landing gear warning horn. A weakness of such methods is that the warnings and alerts in and of themselves do not prevent damage or injury unless humans respond correctly. 5. Safety procedures. These are known as administrative control strategies, and thus are considered a "soft" control measure. Training and regulations can be put into place, but human error can negate this type of control. Control strategies, techniques, and protective equipment impact the risk equa­tion (R = P x S) in the following ways: • Design and engineering will aim to reduce/eliminate the hazard and works on the probability (P) side of the risk equation, which subsequently reduces/elimi­nates the severity (S). • Safety devices, which can be active or passive, reduce risk in a similar way to design and engineering but are considered less effective. They can be used to reduce sever­ity and/or probability. Active safety devices require human action and are not as effective as passive devices. Examples include seating heights and windshields that provide increased visibility for pilots or collision avoidance systems. Passive devices require no human action to activate. They do not perform active monitoring but are always present. Examples include guardrails and safety nets. • Warning devices increase awareness of the hazards, and hence, reduce the prob­ability of being impacted by hazards. Should the warning be ignored, the full extent of severity will be felt. • Procedures and training are mainly intended to reduce probability (P) but can also reduce severity(ies) as in emergency evacuation drills. • Personal protective equipment (PPE) serves to reduce the severity (S) from a materialized hazard. PPE should be considered the last line of defense, as it requires human input to be worn correctly, and even if worn correctly, it can be uncomfortable and cumbersome to wear. To wrap up some of the most important concepts about safety risk man­agement, let us use the example of a voluntary reporting system for aviation maintenance technicians performing routine maintenance to an Airbus A320. An employee reported that the shift change process does not ensure that a work task has proper continuity between technicians. A proper safety management system will institutionalize a routine method for assessing the risk associated with such a hazard, would imple­ment controls for the risk, and then would provide a means to measure the control in the future to assess adequacy. INCIDENT AND AcciDENT INvESTIGATION Some progressive companies investigate all unintended events, irrespective of whether these events led to injuries, illnesses, property damage, or equipment damage. This is done so that hazards are detected before they cause a significant impact on safety. Unfortunately there are still situations when safety is impacted, sometimes severely. This impact can range from incidents to accidents. An impor­tant component of the safety effort at any organization is an incident and accident investigation system. By investigating accidents, organizations learn how to prevent future accidents. Most companies, however, require some criteria to be met before an investigation is triggered. Investigations are initiated, for example, if accidents • Require reporting on the occupational safety and health administration 300 log • Generate workers' compensation claims • Cause personal injuries or lost workdays • Meet national transportation safety board definitions of accidents/incidents • Result in an environmental spill • Cause property and/or equipment damage over a certain dollar value Once an investigation is triggered, the processes used, whether they are FAA/ NTSB, OSHA, or EPA related, are very similar. A formal notification system should be in place to provide timely notice of such events to the safety department. A typi­cal investigation process is now described. Once the safety department is informed of an event, an immediate determina­tion is made about whether the event meets the company's criteria for an investiga­tion. When an investigation begins, depending on the circumstances, one or more individuals may be assigned to conduct the investigation, especially when it is clear that there may be more than one operating department involved, such as for inci­dents occurring during pushback where a flight crew, ramp agents, and perhaps ramp tower personnel may all be involved. The manner in which the investigation is conducted is a function of the type of event and the circumstances under which it occurred. Typically, all key person­nel involved in an incident or accident are asked to submit written statements describing the facts and circumstances as they saw them. In addition, provisions are made immediately for conducting interviews with the key individuals involved in the incident or accident. These interviews can be done in person or over the tele­phone, depending on the specific circumstances. In person interviews are preferred. Similarly, interviews can be done individually or with a part or all of an entire crew. The people being interviewed are told that the purpose of the interview is safety only, that the information will not be used for any disciplinary or other pur­pose. Accounts will remain confidential to the extent permitted by law. Information learned from these interviews along with written statements, forms an important element of these safety investigations. In addition to the interviews and personnel statements, other records and documents may be obtained and reviewed. Such material might include training records, training manuals and syllabi, aircraft and procedures manuals, informa­tion bulletins, and similar material. Another important source of information is the aircraft flight data recorder, which is read out as part of the investigation of many inflight events. Other relevant information is identified and obtained as necessary, including accident reports, technical reports, and any other documentation that may contain information relevant to the incident or that can provide useful infor­mation for formulating recommended practices and corrective actions. Following the collection of basic information, the investigator assembles and issues an accident report. These are brief, synoptic reports that describe the basic facts and circumstances of the event under investigation, including a history of the event, a summary of damage and injuries, an analysis, a list of findings, and, most importantly, recommendations for corrective or future preventive action. Also included is a brief summary of safety actions taken-operating departments are not required to wait for a formal recommendation from the safety department prior to initiating corrective or preventive action. Findings from safety investigations are derived from the facts and circum­stances associated with the event and are based on the investigator's analysis. There is no effort to determine a cause or probable cause of an event. Findings are essen­tially a list of objective factors related to the event under investigation. The recommendation process is probably the most important part of this safety investigation program, and it is important to understand how it is handled. The accident investigation process described applies to investigations of minor accidents. In the case of a major accident (hull loss, occupational death, or a major environmental spill), coordination will be required with external agencies (NTSB, FAA, OSHA, EPA). (See Chapter 6.) For example, in the event of an aircraft crash, it is important that an airline has a detailed ERP that contains, among other things, detailed plans for an airline go-team who will participate in the accident investigation. The go-team should be headed by a senior manager, who serves as the primary coordinator for all company activities related to an accident investigation. Appropriate technical personnel are designated as potential members of a go-team, the actual makeup of which is determined on the basis of known facts at the time of notification, most importantly, aircraft type and location. With regard to the latter, for any accident occurring outside of U.S. airspace, the company go-team reports to the U.S. accredited representative, in full accordance with international civil aviation organization Annex 1 3. To support the go-team, all necessary equipment and supplies, such as PPE, communications gear, and other material that may be necessary to conduct a major accident investigation, must be ready for instant shipment to the scene of an accident. All members of the go-team should be formally trained in accident investigation and must have the OSHA-required blood-borne pathogen training. The go-team roster should also identify other personnel who are tasked with providing administrative support to its technical members. The ERP specifies the staffing of a command post by designated personnel from the affected airline. These people are responsible for the coordination of all activities related to the accident investigation, including the assembly of records, manuals, bulletins, and other necessary materials. Oversight and leadership of the entire effort should be under the direction of senior management, including the corporate safety officer. An annual emergency response drill is required to ensure that the plan is adequate and that the designated personnel are appropriately trained. Although absolutely necessary, an ERP and associated elements of the safety function are quite obviously something that no airline wants to activate for real. To meet this challenge, every airline company must have some form of independent, proactive accident prevention effort. The best means to accomplish this is to seek to identify hazards and risks consistently and then to eliminate these risks through accident prevention measures using safety management system concepts. On a final note, virtually all operational incidents will require a certain level of technical investigation and analysis to fully understand and identify the underly­ing cause factors. Within the airline corporate structure, investigative responsibility for flight safety incidents must be clearly assigned. Similarly, professional investiga­tive methods must be consistently employed in the technical area. Use of investigative tools such as the digital flight data recorder (DFDR) requires a consistent objective and confidential method of analysis, often under the supervision of the national transportation safety board if the Board assumes jurisdiction of the accident or incident. Also, since analysis methods require complex transcription methods, it is likely that DFDR analysis will occur at the maintenance or engineering department. DFDR contents must always be maintained in a strict confidential status with operational DFDR analysis performed by personnel familiar with current operational procedures. RoLE oF UNIONS Quite a few airline pilot unions exist, such as the Southwest Airlines Pilots' Association ( SWAPA), with more than 8 ,000 members, or the Allied Pilots Association affiliated with American Airlines, which has around 1 5,000 members. The largest is the International Federation of Air Line Pilots (IFALPA), which is a labor union founded in 1948, headquartered in Montreal, Canada, and accounts for over 100,000 members in over 1 00 countries. Air safety is a primary responsibility of every airline pilot. As the oldest and largest airline pilots' union, the main role of IFALPA's air safety structure is to provide channels of communi­cation for line pilots to report air safety problems. The U.S. component of IF ALP A is the Air Line Pilots Association (ALPA). An additional role is to stimulate safety awareness among individual pilots to enable flight crewmembers to be constructive critics of the airspace system. Finally, the air safety structure helps investigate airline accidents. Over the years, ALP A's air safety structure has contributed significantly to air safety. Airline pilot unions have trained safety volunteers and led industry projects on aircraft wiring safety, human performance, and nonpunitive corporate cultures, among many other hot topics. Focusing on ALPA as an example, the basic unit of the union is the local council-the pilots of a single airline at a particular operating base. Each local coun­cil normally has an air safety committee, which processes local air safety problems and is headed by the local council air safety chairperson (LASC), who is appointed to a 2-year term by the local executive council (LEC) or the LEC chairperson. An airline's central air safety committee is then made up of all of the LASCs from that airline's various councils. The central air safety chairperson (CASC), appointed to a 2-year term by the master executive council (MEC) or MEC chair­person, presides over the committee, which handles unresolved problems from the local councils and those broader in scope than local issues. The national safety structure of the Air Line Pilots Association is composed of five management groups, headed up by Executive Air Safety Chairman, in these specific safety areas: • Aircraft Design and Operations • Airport and Ground Environment • Air Traffic Services • Human Factors and Training Group • Accident Analysis The Accident Investigation Board of the Air Line Pilots Association oversees investigation of accidents involving the air carriers they represent. The board coordinates ALPA's participation in accident or incident investigations conducted by the national transportation safety board or the federal aviation administration and ensures that the appropriate ALPA subgroup deter­mines the significant factors in each air carrier accident. ALPA also maintains a worldwide accident/incident hotline for its pilots to call for help if involved in an aircraft critical safety event. If deemed necessary, ALPA will also employ its Critical Incident Response Program (CIRP), which counts on trained counselors who work to mitigate the psychological effect of an accident before harmful stress occurs. More specific to SMS, since 2008, ALPA has been a leader in supporting safety management system principles as set forth in the international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual. The ALPA policy statement is that they support safety management system when it is developed and implemented in accor­dance with the following: • A documented, clearly defined commitment to the safety management system from the CEO-a writ­ten safety management system policy, signed by the CEO, which recognizes the business benefit of asset preservation and mishap prevention. The policy must show commitment to con­tinuous improvement in the level of safety, management of risk, and creation of a strong safety culture. • Documented lines of safety accountability. • Active involvement of the affected employees in a nonpunitive reporting system and a commitment to a "just" safety culture. • A documented, robust Safety Risk Management (SRM) program. The safety risk management pro­gram requires the participation of labor organization(s) as the representative of their employee groups in both the identification of hazards and in the develop­ment of risk mitigation strategies. • A documented process for collecting and analyzing safety data and implementing corrective action plans. • A documented method for continuous improvement of the SMS. (Source: ALPA Administrative Manual, Section 80, Part 1, page 1 8, www.alpa.org) Working to maintain the highest levels of airline safety is an enormous chal­lenge. The depth and breadth of ALPA's air safety structure, and the critical role it plays in meeting that challenge, are unique in the air transportation industry. Pilot unions are just one of several, powerful and resource-rich labor orga­nizations that can be used as an extension of an airline's SMS. Aviation mainte­nance technicians often work as part of labor unions, as with the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (IAMAW), which represent over 600,000 workers in more than 200 industries. The IAMAW's Safety & Health Department has promoted safety in topics such as hazardous material, occupa­tional health, and as proponents of the Ground Operations Safety Action Program. Safety leaders in the Association of Flight Attendants (AFA) have been strong champions of finding better ways of managing crewmember fatigue, investigating aircraft cabin air quality, fighting the spread of communicable diseases, and pas­senger security screening. After all, as shown in Figure 12-6, flight attendants often have the best perspective of issues affecting passenger safety on a routine basis, such as turbulence and health ailments. AFA is the world's largest labor union for flight attendants and represents nearly 50,000 cabin crewmembers at 18 airlines. Whether they are safety leaders in pilot unions, maintenance technician unions, flight attendant unions, or other organized labor groups, individuals who perform safety work for labor unions are often highly motivated to find solutions and can contribute greatly to an airline's SMS. COMPONENT #3: SAFETY ASSURANCE Once the risk assessment and controls are in place and "ALARP" has been declared, the safety management system process shifts to the safety assurance side of the ledger to pro­vide feedback on how the safety risk management process is performing. By lever­aging efficiencies gained in safety management system data and combining cross-functional trends into a centralized safety database, safety professionals can analyze what is happening over time better and target their mitigations strategically. If performing well, the safety assurance process provides positive reinforcement that risks are properly managed. However, new hazards may inadvertently be introduced into an safety management system whenever a change occurs. There are numerous sad examples from safety history that demonstrate how the best of intentions for risk mitigation end up introducing new hazards into oper­ations. One example that some readers may be familiar with is how the introduc­tion of air bags in cars initially caused serious injury or death to small people when the air bags activated for collisions. An aviation example of an unintended conse­quence from the actions taken to promote safety is the incredible precision avail­able in modern flight deck avionics instrumentation. Such precision is usually quite helpful to promoting safety, but the Gol Airlines and Embraer jet midair collision over Brazil in 2011 pointed out the midair risk of two aircraft flying at the exact same altitude over the same point in time. Had the altimeter or navigation systems been less precise the accident may not have occurred. Also, a mature risk mitiga­tion process which is ostensibly under control may become unsafe when faced with changes to the system. Furthermore, a new operational procedure or system change needs to be verified by the safety risk management process to see whether it has an impact on other processes. One of the more important aspects of safety assurance is an effective formal change management system. As previously mentioned, a key aspect of change management is being able to measure what effect we have had with actions taken to sustain or enhance safety. It has been stated as a matter of truth that the only thing constant in aviation is that things will surely change. A formal process for managing these frequent changes is necessary for an efficient airline safety management system program. Every airline should create and maintain a formal process that identifies changes that are occurring within the company that may impact previously developed processes. The formal change management system should consider how critical the system is to the airline, and whether the change introduces new, unforeseen hazards or risks. To determine whether change is occurring, and to detect whether it is happen­ing to the benefit or detriment of risk management, safety performance monitoring and measurement is a critical part of an efficient safety management system safety assurance process. After the hazards are identified and the risks are assessed, properly mitigated, and controlled, operational performance must be monitored and measured in order to ensure optimum effectiveness of the SMS. This is an internal process of the safety management system team, focusing on data and information regarding the performance of the safety system. Finally, the last element of Safety Assurance is the continuous improvement of the safety management system operation. Quality feedback monitoring processes are strongly recom­mended by both international civil aviation organization and the federal aviation administration to enhance the entire operation of the system. SAFETY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS It is tricky to measure how well safety management system is working because health does not neces­sarily correlate to a reduction in the number of accidents. As a result, a key com­ponent of the safety management system model that was adopted from the business realm is the use of performance indicators to assess the effectiveness of safety programs. Under safety management system these are called safety performance indicators (SPis). international civil aviation organization Annex 1 9 defines an SPI as "a data based safety parameter used for monitoring and assessing safety per­formance." It measures whether or not a system is operating in accordance with the goals of the safety program as opposed to simply meeting regulatory requirements. Using SPis represent a shift from traditional data collection and analysis methods to the development of mechanisms that continuously monitor safety risks, detect emerging safety risks, and determine any necessary corrective actions. Unfortunately, the international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual only provides the defini­tion and guidance on the use of SPis with a few generic examples. Consequently, individual organizations must develop their own meaningful measurements. There are several traits that determine a well-crafted SPI. An SPI, if properly created, for the organization: • Gives direct and unambiguous information on the specific item being measured. • Draws attention to dangerous trends and events. • Adds value to the safety performance. • Analyzes both internal and external factors that can impact safety controls. • Aligns with an organization's safety targets. • Measures what they are intended to measure. • Is responsive to changes and statistically significant. The challenge of creating SPis lies in narrowing the focus of a specific measurement. Organizations should focus on selecting indicators that can impact future operations from the unwanted events that they are trying to eliminate. Each SPI should be created for a different purpose, and the more critical the issue, the nar­rower the focus should be. Every organization has the flexibility to create its own SPis and should do so according to its needs and operations, although some SPis may be predetermined and required by a regulatory authority as a mandatory measurement. Flexibility is important because there are no predefined SPis for specific aeronautical ser­vices. This characteristic enables organizations to develop the cornerstone for their performance-based oversight. Since ICAO's verbiage lacks advice on creating SPis, lATA is currently developing material to assist operators in this task. To provide an SPI example, Figure 12-7 shows a commercial jet operating in the vicinity of thunderstorms, which of course could produce inflight turbulence. Such operations are common in commercial aviation and an associated safety performance indicator chosen by the airline may depend on the culture and opera­tional specifics for the organization. For example, one air carrier may choose to create an SPI that tracks the very few passenger injuries that occur due to turbu­lence, while another one may use an SPI that measures a wider number of inci­dents by tracking how many flight attendant injuries result from encounters with inflight turbulence. Another operator may prefer to create an even wider SPI that measures the number of unforecast turbulence encounters as reported by pilots, whereas another airline may prefer an SPI that measures an even larger population of events, such as moderate and severe turbulence encounters as measured through a flight data monitoring program. Creating SPis paves the way for setting safety alert levels. Organizations should select statistical process control limits of the maximum number of safety events that can occur for them to still be operating within the acceptable range of safety. Statistical analysis of data from SPis enables organizations to pick a quantifiable threshold for the alert zone. When the alert levels are reached, then there should be further investigations or a causal analysis combined with a plan that uses safety management system tools to bring performance back to an acceptable safety level. Although alert levels are somewhat subjective, they can be very useful to help determine between signifi­cant and insignificant trends. As the aviation industry shifts to using SPis, organizations will benefit from the conclusions they can derive from the metrics. This data will provide meaningful information that cannot be manipulated and that truly reflects operational trends. Additionally, the flexibility of customizing SPis allows each organization to focus on its own operational context and challenges. Commercial aviation can use numerous data acquisition approaches for monitoring and measuring safety performance as part of an SMS, which include the following: 1. Continuous monitoring comes from a variety of sources, but especially from line managers who are the technical experts in any organization. 2. Internal audits are conducted by operating departments of the organization. 3. Internal evaluation audits are conducted by people who are functionally inde­pendent of the process being evaluated. 4. External audits are conducted by the federal aviation administration or by third-party organizations using tools that conform to standards agreed to by trade organizations. 5. Investigations of accidents, incidents, or other safety-related events are conducted in a nonpunitive fashion to determine why the safety problem happened. 6. An employee reporting system such as ASAP or other voluntary method is utilized. 7. Analysis of data is conducted, especially to identify root causes of any nonconformance and to identify potential new hazards. 8. System assessment is conducted to determine the safety performance and effectiveness of risk controls. AUDITS AND INSPECTIONS The mention of audits and inspections bears special discussion, because as noted above, a primary element of safety assurance is the need to continuously improve a company's SMS. Rather than maintain the safety status quo, the safety management system process seeks continuous improvement using tools such as internal evaluations and inde­pendent audits to obtain timely feedback information. Each safety management system should create and maintain a formal process for detecting the reasons for substandard performance of the safety management system and also to determining how that substandard performance impacts operations, in hopes of either eliminating the reasons altogether or at least making them less damaging. Continuous improvement can be greatly enhanced by a strong safety culture and committed management officials. Proactive evaluation of facili­ties, equipment and procedures, and vigilance are a must for safety management system effectiveness. Continuous improvement of the safety management system is a never ending goal and two overall pro­cesses can be used toward that end: • Preventative/corrective action assignments must be tracked and managed. This is an active process requiring routine follow-up and continuous assessment. • Top management review should be regularly conducted by the safety management system Accountable Executive and other safety boards and committees at all levels of management. This review should include the inputs and outputs of safety risk management and the lessons learned from the safety assurance process. Analyzing and addressing hazards after they have materialized (caused acci­dents and injuries) are commonly referred to as a reactive approach to safety. The preferred proactive approach to safety requires that hazards and hazardous conditions be identified before they cause accidents and injuries. Using modern safety management system strategies, the proactive approach to safety does not require a triggering event to take place. Instead, the proactive method aggressively seeks safety informa­tion to identify potential future problems. The international civil aviation organization Safety Management Manual illustrates these three safety management strategies detailed below. One way of accomplishing safety assurance in an safety management system environment is through the comprehensive audit process. The words "audit" and "inspection" are often used interchangeably with some confusion about their definitions. Most schools of thought (including the authors of this text), however, consider an audit to be more comprehensive and have a greater scope of work than an inspection. While inspec­tions usually identify workplace hazards, audits are designed to evaluate programs and management issues that have resulted, or could result, in workplace hazards. Safety audits are an integral part of a safety program, and in addition to uncov­ering hazards, audits reveal the level of compliance with regulatory standards as well as measure the effectiveness of the safety program. Some of the common approaches to auditing an airline or airport facility are as follows: • Comprehensive audits. These are extensive, detailed safety inspections/surveys (site conditions and programs) of the entire organization (an air carrier), a facil­ity within an organization (an air carrier hub or maintenance facility), or an operation within a facility (fuel handling at the ramp). These audits are usually conducted on an annual basis by a team of safety professionals from within and outside the organization, facility, or site. They are usually led by the company safety director or the divisional or site safety manager. This type of audit results in a formal written report of findings and recommendations and usually requires a response within an agreed time frame. For example, Figure 12-8 shows a tech­nician using a ball rotary file to modify a scallop ring so heat expansion will not cause cracking. An audit of an engine shop such as the one shown in the figure can help catch factors that lead to a deviation from established procedures and then produce recommendations to prevent a recurrence. • Self-audits. These are informal daily, weekly, or monthly audits that resemble inspections and form the crux of the internal inspection program (IEP). The frequency of checks depends on the operation being assessed. For example, cer­tain areas of airports have to be checked several times per day, whereas some operations in a hangar or on the ramp may only require one inspection each day. These audits are conducted by on-site line management at a given facility and usually result in a checklist of items that either are in acceptable condition or need fixing. No reports are normally generated as part of these audits. One of the functions of the Director of Safety is to help set up and provide expertise to local internal inspection teams. • Status audits. These audits are intended to determine the status of compliance at the time of observation. These are usually subject-oriented audits and are conducted in areas of high risk and/or areas of known or perceived concern. Evaluating a weld­ing operation is an example of a status audit. These audits may generate reports if the findings are serious enough to require management's attention. COMPONENT #4: SAFETY PROMOTION An integral part of a strong safety management system culture is safety promotion. If the attitude of employees is that the program is only for compliance with regulations, then regard for safety and the safety management system will not permeate through all aspects of daily operations. For this reason, the final component of safety management system calls for the airline to continuously promote safety as a core value of the organization. The building blocks of a good program are depicted in Figure 12-9, and train­ing programs should be tailored to an employee's job function in the organiza­tion. The left-most block in the figure describes how operational personnel should understand the airline's safety policy and have at least a functional understand­ing of how safety management system operates. Added to that, the center block in the figure portrays how managers and supervisors must also have a more in-depth understanding of the safety processes used by their airline to include hazards identification and change management to address the risk associated with such hazards. Lastly, the right-most block of the figure depicts how senior managers must go beyond safety management system fundamentals to ensure that organizational standards and regulations are observed. SAFETY TRAINING AND EDUCATION Within the safety promotion component of SMS, there needs to be a formal and recurrent process for training employees in safety. This requires creating and main­taining a safety training program that ensures personnel are trained and competent to perform safety management system duties. The scope of the safety training should be appropriate to each individual's role in the SMS, meaning that the training programs should be customized to the different roles played by employee groups in the organization. An aviation maintenance technician working in a hangar and a customer service agent staffing a check-in counter at the terminal will naturally have different impacts on the safety management system of their airline and need to be trained on how their role impacts the safety of the operation. It is important to note that the AE should also receive special safety management system training regarding roles and responsibilities, including an understanding of the safety management system and its relationship to the organization's overall business strategy. Safety training is most effective when it is integrated into a company's per­formance and job practice requirements. The following important, yet common, guidelines should be noted and adhered to by organizations: • The company's policy should clearly state the company's commitment to safety. • The training should be conducted on paid work time. • Training must b e in the language that the employee understands and should be delivered at an appropriate pace and comprehension level. • Employees and management should be involved in developing training programs. • Training should be conducted based on identified needs. • Training should have clearly defined goals. • Training should follow good teaching pedagogues and should incorporate the following basic principles: • The attendee must understand the purpose of the instruction. • The information should be organized to maximize understanding. • "Hands-on" experiences should be embedded whenever possible. • The training should be designed for different learning styles, such as written instruction, audiovisual instruction, hands-on exercises, and group learning assignments. Straight lectures should be no more than 20 minutes long. • Key concepts should be repeated for reinforcement. • There should be an evaluation component to training. Both the attendees and the training itself should be evaluated. Attendees can be evaluated through tests, quizzes, assignments, etc. Course evaluation questionnaires/surveys can be used to evaluate course content and its ability to achieve the stated goals. • All employee training records should be documented and maintained. This will help ensure that every employee who needs training receives it, that refresher courses are provided when needed, that documentation is available when required to prove that training was conducted (a regulatory requirement in some cases), and that the training was appropriate. Documentation should include the following: • The name and signature of the trained employee • The training date • The topic, including a brief lesson plan • Evidence of the employee's successful completion • The name and signature of the trainer SAFETY CoMMUNICATION A large part of safety promotion involves the critical need for communication. A robust safety management system culture encourages a learning environment where employees communicate openly up and down the management chain without fear of reprisal. Each organization should create and maintain a formal means for safety communi­cation that ensures that all personnel are fully aware of the SMS, conveys informa­tion that is critical to safety, explains why particular safety actions are taken, and details why safety procedures are introduced or changed. This guidance means that employees should have easy access to their organization's safety management system manual and associ­ated safety process and procedures. Communication processes should also include airports and other providers of service to the airline. A healthy safety management system may also feature safety newsletters, notices, and bulletins, plus the use of Web sites or e-mail to keep employees in the loop regarding safety issues and resolutions. Safety publications are an important component of a safety pro­gram. Most airlines publish regular internal safety documents to maintain high individual awareness of safety and risk management. Videos are also used to dis­seminate safety information to all employees. Communication and education are critical elements of any proactive safety program; there must be an effective mecha­nism in place to ensure the flow of critical safety information within the company. In conjunction with the safety risk management process, the communication of pertinent information necessary for reduction of the risk must be provided to the safety user. Depending on the type of risk involved, the user may be a pilot, flight attendant, aviation maintenance technician, or related support person. Recurring material failure causes, such as fuel pump failures, would probably only be dis­tributed to technical services or the maintenance department, while human factors issues would be best communicated to all employee groups for example. Figure 12-10 shows a pair of aviation maintenance technicians working under the cowling of a Boeing 73 7-800 power plant. A safety manager viewing such an operation may contemplate what communication processes are used to relay important safety information to them and whether the corporate culture he or she is helping to create is one that encourages such technicians to freely report the haz­ards that they encounter. Communication takes on many forms in an SMS. The airline safety, mainte­nance, and flight operations organizations are often mistakenly viewed as separate entities with little or no shared mutual interests, when in actuality, the three orga­nizations are closely aligned by complex relationships as will be shown in the aviation safety report system examples later in this chapter. While the maintenance department provides virtually all the technological expertise necessary to maintain the aircraft fleet, the pilots and flight attendants are its end use customers and, therefore, must maintain a user's level of technical knowledge and related safety issues. Another key link of the relationship is forged by the airworthiness concept. While the captain is responsible for ensuring the final airworthiness and safety of the aircraft, it is the maintenance department that maintains or returns an aircraft to an airworthy condition. A fundamental component of this link is the air­craft logbook, which serves to document the status, degradation, and restoration of the aircraft between variable levels of serviceability. The third component of the flight-maintenance-safety relationship is the regulatory-procedural link. Both procedural and technical regulatory issues must be closely coordinated. While regulatory requirements emanate from the FAA, they are often precipitated by national transportation safety board investigative findings, thereby necessitating direct communication between agencies for effective implementation of evolving safety requirements. Because of the highly complex nature of modern aircraft, a means to quickly analyze and disseminate critical federal aviation administration and national transportation safety board safety informa­tion is required. In addition, conduct of both major and minor technically oriented investigations will require in-depth and thorough coordination between these agen­cies. This is also true with foreign regulatory agencies; however, the specific pro­cesses vary widely between nations. HOW TO IMPLEMENT SMS: A PHASED APPROACH As noted earlier, 10 years ago, major U.S. Airlines were invited by the federal aviation administration to par­ticipate in the safety management system Pilot Project to work closely with the federal aviation administration to establish a pro­gram of voluntary safety management system implementation. Today we are in the midst of mandatory safety management system implementation for FAR Part 21 airlines as previously described. The federal aviation administration provides further information on the current state of safety management system Implementation as fol­lows on its Web site: (www.faa.gov) : 1 4 CPR Part 5 specifies a basic set of processes integral to an effective safety management system but does not specify particular methods for implementing these processes. In other words, the regulation defines "what" must be accomplished, not "how" it must be accomplished. The current federal aviation administration Advisory Circular entitled: "Safety necessary for full implementation of safety management system throughout the organization. Two principal activities make up Level One: a. Gap Analysis: The first step in developing an safety management system is for the organization to analyze its existing programs, systems, and activities with respect to the safety management system functional expectations found in the safety management system Framework. This analysis is a process and is called a "gap analysis," the "gaps" being those elements in the safety management system Framework that are not already being performed by the Aviation Service Provider. b. Implementation Plan: Once the gap analysis has been performed, an Implementation Plan is prepared. The Implementation Plan is simply a "road map" describing how the Aviation Service Provider intends to close the existing gaps by meeting the objectives and expectations in the safety management system Framework. 3. Level Two: reactive process, basic risk management. At this level, the Aviation Service Provider develops and implements a basic safety risk management process. Information acquisition, processing, and analysis functions are imple­mented and a tracking system for risk control and corrective actions are estab­lished. At this phase, the Aviation Service Provider develops an awareness of hazards and responds with appropriate systematic application of preventative or corrective actions. 4. Level Three: proactive processes, looking ahead. At this level, the activities involved in the safety risk management process involve careful analysis of sys­tems and tasks involved, identification of potential hazards in these functions, and development of risk controls. The risk management process developed at Level Two is used to analyze, document, and track these activities. At this level it can be said that the organization has a full-up, functioning SMS. 5. Level Four: continuous improvement, continued assurance. The final level of safety management system maturity is the continuous improvement level. Processes have been in place and their performance and effectiveness have been verified. The complete safety assur­ance processes, including continuous monitoring, and the remaining features of the other safety risk management and safety assurance processes are functioning. A major objective of a successful safety management system is to attain and maintain this continuous improvement status for the life of the organization. (Source: www.f aa.gov) FUTURE CHALLENGES Today, the transformation of commercial aviation safety into the safety management system framework is in full swing on a global basis. Using quality principles as a successful guide, safety management system will continue to employ new methods with empowerment of employees and positive safety culture techniques to obtain safety levels never before achieved in commercial aviation. This is not to say that there are no challenges ahead as safety management system is integrated into daily operations. Stolzer and Goglia (2015) talk about some of these difficulties in their book, Safety Management Systems in Aviation, 2nd ed. A strong safety record is not necessarily an accurate predictor of future safety performance. Currently, the literature available about safety management system leans more toward developing and implement­ing programs, and there is somewhat of a gap of information regarding how to measure its effectiveness (see, Chapter 12, Stolzer and Goglia (2015) entitled "SMS Effectiveness" for a detailed discussion). For example, early metrics for measur­ing effectiveness were more reactive and measured accidents and incidents after they occurred. That method did not lend way to preventing future problems from occurring. Strong evaluation programs, then, should be developed to focus on both strengths and weaknesses of the safety management system program in an attempt to improve the sys­tem. Organizations should move away from trying to eliminate the things that go wrong and work toward making sure as many things as possible go right. Moving forward in the development of safety management system programs, we could expect to see a shift toward investigating right methods and practices as opposed to focusing on the wrong way to do things. Currently, safety management system effectiveness centers on the collection and aggregation of infor­mation from sources such as ASAP, FOQA, federal aviation administration surveillance, internal evaluation programs, and accident investigations. However, there is currently research assess­ing two new quantitative methods, both adopted from the business world, which could be used for future evaluation of safety management system programs (Stolzer & Goglia, 2015, pp. 348-349). • The first quantitative method is data envelopment analysis (DEA), a powerful technique to evaluate and benchmark organizations. DEA relies on linear pro­gramming, which is frequently used in operations research to evaluate the effec­tiveness of certain operational segments of an organization. It does this by using a math algorithm to consider all the inputs and resources used by each segment of an organization and comparing the relationships of the variables involved. Stolzer and Goglia (2015) explain that DEA is particularly useful when compar­ing "best practices." The benefits of DEA would be that multiple inputs and out­puts could be compared, and peer measurement could be ascertained. • The second quantitative method of safety management system effectiveness is Input-Output (10) which analyzes the interdependencies between the various branches of an econ­omy. Stolzer and Goglia (2015) state in their book that 10 demonstrates how parts of a system are affected by any change in the system. Thus, the 10 process would be very useful in the safety assurance phase of change management. Researchers at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University are currently exploring these two methods for use on future safety management system effectiveness studies. With the employ­ment of these new DEA and 10 tools, safety management system effectiveness will be more scientific and less equivocal in the future. As the March 201 8 deadline for implementing Part 121 safety management system approaches, air­lines must be open to changes in culture and shifts in management philosophies. First, to be successful, senior leadership must have a strong, visible commitment to the four safety management system components, or the four "Pillars " upon which safety management system is based. Executives must also adopt a more democratic style of management while maintain­ing that not all ideas will be accepted and implemented despite being appreciated and considered. Companies should ease employees into this system using the phased implementation process, thus allowing the organizational culture to adapt and evolve to these new concepts. Adopting this enlightened mindset as soon as possible will facilitate successful implementation and smooth safety management system execution in the years ahead. aviation safety report system EXAMPLES Following are some examples from NASA's Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), in the original text submitted, including grammatical errors. These reports demonstrate the look and feel of operations that do not comply with safety management system princi­ples. Notice that, although each scenario is complex, several blatant warning signs exist showing that the situation is not following best safety management system practices. MAINTENANCE PROCEDURES AND fUEL SYSTEM MALFUNCTION Title: Vastly different perspectives on safety between maintenance and flight crew. In this report, a Boeing 737-800 First Officer discovers on the third leg of his flight that the fuel system is malfunctioning, causing fuel spills and uncontrolled fuel transfer between wings. A Maintenance Supervisor suggests that this situa­tion is not mechanically possible, and the crew should take it flying and see what happens. The crew declines. I served as the Relief Pilot for this flight. The trip started off with the air­craft was over fueled by 1,000 LBS by refueling personnel. A new Weight and Balance was obtained with the revised fuel weight and the flight departed uneventfully. The aircraft landed and refueled with no indications of a fuel sys­tem problem. Next leg was uneventful as well. While refueling ground person­nel notified the pilots the aircraft was leaking something out of the left wing. I went to investigate while the Captain and First Of ficer remained in the cockpit. I observed fuel overflowing out the left wing at an extreme rate. I notified the Captain and at that same time refueling was terminated and the overflow condi­tion ceased. I estimate 1,000-2,000 LBS were spilled. Clean up crews and Fire Department personnel began the clean up as we de-boarded the aircraft. The on board Mechanic began to troubleshoot the system. While troubleshooting, I along with the crew viewed fuel transferring from one wing to the other with the fuel valve switches closed. This was concerning due to the fact that if this occurred airborne the aircraft would become uncontrollable after 5-1 0 min­utes due to the imbalance. The Captain and the mechanic went to Operations to call Maintenance after troubleshooting. I was present during the conversa­tion with the Captain when he was discussing the issue with a Mechanic on the phone. The Captain explained that with this uncontrollable fuel transfer to one wing the aircraft would not be safe to fly until it was positively fixed. The dis­cussion heated as the Captain said, "He was not going to take the Mechanic's advice to go fly and see what happens airborne." The conversation ended with the Captain explaining that the aircraft was not going to fly when he, the First Of ficer, the Relief Pilot and the on board Mechanic refuse to fly for safety. Following the phone call I talked with the Captain further about the phone call. He stated, the mechanic said this situation was not mechanically possible and the crew should take it flying and see what happens. He also told me the mechanic said, "Pilots what if situations too much." The Captain and First Officer then taxied the aircraft to a new parking spot. When they returned they stated the fuel once again transferred uncontrollably to one wing. Not one member of the crew wanted to lose a day and desired to have their full planned layover, but safety dictated that it was not safe to fly that aircraft until the mechanical situation was positively identified and resolved. The whole crew was placed in a hotel for the night until a rescue flight arrived the next day. At that point we took the new aircraft and the rescue crew took our aircraft after the plane's defuel valve was manually closed. Later I talked with two dif ferent on board mechanics. They said that the manual de-fueling handle broke open and that there was also a refueling valve that was broken. He also stated this aircraft had an issue prior to our flight. I have several safety con­cerns listed below as it relates to this situation. 1 . There was no write up in the aircraft logbook about any such fuel system issue prior to our flight so there was no way a crew would know of such issues before they take the aircraft. 2. The over fueling of the aircraft initially may have been caused by the system actually being broken prior to the start of the flight and there are no procedures with refueling personnel to catch this problem. 3. This issue could be occurring with our other aircraft in the fleet and there should be a fleet wide inspection of these system components. 4. My last and greatest concern is with the Maintenance Supervisor who was on the call with the Captain and the potential lack of safety culture at the man­agement level within the Maintenance Department. When the Captain states he is not comfortable to fly along with the entire crew to include the onboard mechanic then those statements should be listened to. Pushing a crew to fly the aircraft and see what happens is not an environment that promotes safety first and could end with disastrous results. That type of culture will cause the airline to lose an aircraft and lives. Question for the reader: Please explain the aspects of the scenario that did not follow safety management system best practices. BOEING 757 STALL WARNING SYSTEM FAULT Title: Miscommunication from confusing maintenance directions. In this report, a Boeing 757-200 flight crew receives a message on their Engine Indicating and Crew Alerting System (EICAS), which is a large flight deck display, as they taxied for takeoff. They returned to the gate for maintenance action which ultimately required several days to complete after determining the fault was a sev­ered wire to the First Officer's stick shaker. When later advised by management that they could have legally flown the flight from Hawaii to the mainland and simply written up the message in the maintenance logbook, the captain, who was newly qualified in this type of aircraft, was incredulous and requested an explanation. I am new on the fleet with about 1 50 hours total time. My First Officer has many hours. During taxi out the First Officer performed flight control checks and observed a white STATUS message on the lower EICAS screen "WARN ELEX." Neither of us had ever seen this message. I stopped the aircraft and parked the brakes. We found a pertinent minimum equipment list which seemed to apply. It showed that it was NOT flight crew placardable. I contacted Dispatch and Maintenance Control. Together we determined that we needed to return to the gate for main­tenance action. Every time we moved the yoke fore and aft we got the W ARN ELEX status message, and after we centered the yoke in the neutral position, the status message would go out after about 10 seconds. After almost three days of maintenance troubleshooting, parts shipments, and an imported maintenance crew from the mainland, a partially severed wire lead­ing to the First Of ficer's stick shaker about a foot below the First Of ficer's yoke was found. The wire had only a few strands of wire connecting the two sides. Apparently, there was enough damage to trigger the WARN ELEX message, but enough wire left to activate the stick shaker when it was tested. Eventually, the mechanics manipulated the yoke enough that the damaged wire completely severed the remaining strands, and then the First Of ficer's stick shaker would no longer work. The damaged wire was then properly repaired, and the problem was corrected, prior to an actual f ailure! That is how the system should work, when problems are identified and repaired before an actual f ailure takes place in the air! In the aftermath of this event, I have been told by very senior company manage­ment pilots that, in this event, I "could" have legally continued the operation to takeoff and fly across the ocean with the white WARN ELEX status message showing. They have told me that this is in compliance with Boeing's procedures. I feel alarmed that this is true! The apparently applicable minimum equipment list shows this is not flight crew placardable. Perhaps there are "some" status messages where it would not be a safety issue to operate with a status message showing prior to takeoff, but who in their right mind would even consider taking off to fly across the ocean when the aircraft is telling you that there is an unknown prob­lem with the stall warning system? Why would senior management pilots tell me that? This is such a "Black and White" safety issue to me that I am very concerned that some other Captain might have ignored this STATUS message, in compliance with Boeing and company procedures, and taken the aircraft to the mainland from the islands. In my event, there was an actual problem, which had we taken off, could have resulted in a real in-flight f ailure of some part of our Stall Warning system. I think that there should be some disclaimer to the policy which allows crew to "disregard" status messages prior to takeof f Obviously, some status messages are more important than others. I am totally comfortable with my decisions in this event, but I question the "safety" of a policy which clearly conflicts with the MEL, which states that I cannot flight crew placard this issue, but if it happens after "brake release," and before takeoff, that I can just "ignore" it, as if it never happened. This is not a smart procedure, for sure. Question for the reader: Please explain what aspects of this scenario show strengths in the airline's safety management system and what parts show safety management system weaknesses. CONCLUSION Despite aviation being one of the safest modes of transportation in the world, accidents still happen. To counter the accidents that do occur, over the past several decades, our industry has adopted new mindsets and practices to make the aviation environment a safer place. One important way we have done this is by requiring the adoption of safety management system both on the international and domestic level. Although safety management as a practice has existed since the birth of aviation, safety management system is a formal and standardized framework for managing a safety program based upon accepted business and scientific processes. Figure 12-12 shows the pilots of an Airbus A330 skimming over cloud tops. Such an image may be what first comes to mind when contemplating safety management system in com­mercial aviation. The reality is that safety management system starts deep in the back offices of air service providers where executives and safety professionals, often teamed with union safety representatives, work to adopt the tenets of SMS. The same occurs in aviation ven­ues ranging from airports, maintenance offices, air traffic control towers, and all other aviation organizations. Each of those links in the commercial aviation safety value chain must have a robust and continuously improving safety management system as their lifeblood. Otherwise, as the saying goes, a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. The four components of SMS, as developed by international civil aviation organization and FAA, and adopted by many throughout the world, provide a systematic approach for achieving new levels of safety that were originally unattainable. Simply stated, Safety Policy means document it in writing, referring to the need to have key aspects of a given safety management system readily available to employees as a written reference. Safety Risk Management is the means to hunt the hazards, then assess and mitigate the risks, referring to the fundamental need of having employees aggressively seek safety problems and hav­ing a means of effecting change to produce better conditions. Safety Assurance is the way to measure and improve it, referring to the need to use scientific principles to determine the value of the actual management processes being used. Lastly, but affecting all other components, Safety Promotion is the learning and sharing of everything in all the components. Although the road to safety management system has been long and sometimes difficult, for students of safety management system the future is very bright indeed. The next few years will bring increased international collaboration and employment opportunities. Aviation safety pro­fessionals will find that safety management system is a journey of continuous improvement, not a final destination. KEY TERMS Accountable Executive Analysis of Data As Low As Reasonably Practicable (ALARP) Continuous Monitoring Design and Engineering Emergency Response Plan (ERP) Employee Reporting System External Audits Gap Analysis Hazard Human Era international civil aviation organization Annex 19 Implementation Plan Internal Audits Internal Evaluation Audits Investigations Organizational Era Personal Protective Equipment Probability Procedures and Training Risk Safety Action Group (SAG) Safety Devices Safety Management Systems (SMS) Safety Performance Indicator (SPI) Safety Review Board (SRB) Safety Training Program Severity System Assessment Technical Era The Four Components of safety management system Safety Assurance Safety Policy Safety Promotion Safety Risk Management Warning Devices REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. Discuss the evolution of safety management system principles. 2. List and discuss the salient features of the Four Components of SMS. 3. Explain how safety assurance relates to safety risk management. 4. What is the concept of as low as reasonably possible and why is it significant? 5. Compare and contrast the differences between hazards and risks. 6. Provide an example of why change management is such a critical aspect of SMS. 7. Discuss which safety management system component you think is the most important. Back up your answer with a specific example. 8. Select a sample and very specific hazard for a commercial aviation operator. Assess the risk presented by the hazard and recommend several controls. 9. Why is communication important to SMS? 10. Describe the steps of the safety management system maturity model used for safety management system implementation. 11. Discuss the future of Safety Management Systems in aviation to today's aviation safety professional.