CHAPTER FIVE LEARNING OBJECTIVES After completing this chapter, you should be able to • Recognize the organizational structure of ICAO, the FAA, OSHA, and the EPA. • Understand the basic rulemaking process of ICAO, the FAA, OSHA, and the EPA. • Describe some of the key international civil aviation organization developments that helped shape international aviation. • Describe some of the early federal legislation in the United States that helped shape the federal aviation administration and the airline industry during its formative years. • Explain why inspector workload has been greatly affected since airline deregulation. • Discuss the evolution of occupational safety and health administration and the EPA. • List and discuss major occupational safety and health administration standards that are of importance to aviation operations. • List and discuss major EPA laws that are of importance to aviation operations. INTRODUCTION The truth is that the government's role in safety is neither a glamorous nor cap­tivating topic of discussion in the commercial aviation community. However, the discourse is a necessity since regulation and official guidance are critical compo­nents of the aviation industry. Governmental agencies have a key responsibility to promote safe operations to protect everyone coming into contact with aviation operations. A sad fact about government regulatory efforts is that poor human decisions can result in regulatory protections being bypassed and can produce a serious acci­dent. Governmental safety guidance, be it compulsory or advisory in nature, is one of the most important defenses against human error, but only if followed. With a single poor choice, all the imposed safeguards disappear. An even uglier truth, though, is that much of the safety produced by govern­ment agencies are the result of blood priority. By this we mean that, historically, if lives had not been lost from an airplane accident there is often little chance that changes would have been made to existing policies. Tragically, it has tradition­ally taken the spilling of blood to modify government regulations. Although this process is slowly changing as the industry and regulators increasingly value the concepts of proactive safety covered in Chapter 7, the process is very slow to change. This chapter explores the role of government agencies, such as the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO ) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and how these organizations affect aviation operations. We will cover not only the traditional aviation-focused agencies, but others that also impact aviation safety due to the extended reach of their work, such as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Each section will talk about the background, organiza­tion, and rulemaking authority of each agency to give us a better insight into how the rules and regulations come into effect. These organizations are focused primar­ily on promoting safety before accidents occur, as opposed to the investigation of accidents. The next chapter is dedicated to accident investigation and features the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), a U.S. government agency dedicated to such matters. INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION (ICAO) The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations and serves as the global forum for international civil aviation. The vision of international civil aviation organization is to achieve sustainable growth for the civil aviation systems of the world. To implement this vision, international civil aviation organization had the following five strategic objectives for 2014-2016: • Safety. Enhance global civil aviation safety and develop oversight capabilities. The international civil aviation organization Global Aviation Safety Plan (GASP) outlines key safety activities. • Air Navigation Capacity and Efficiency. Increase the capacity of the skies and improve the global civil aviation system's efficiency; upgrade air navigation and aerodrome infrastructure for developing new procedures to optimize aviation system performance. • Security and Facilitation. Enhance global civil aviation security and facilitation. Provide leadership in related border security matters. • Economic Development of Air Transport. Foster the development for an eco­nomically sound and viable civil aviation system with air transport framework focused on economic policies and supporting activities. • Environmental Protection. Minimize the adverse environmental effects of civil aviation activities. The reader should note that in the parlance of the United Nations, and there­fore ICAO, what many Americans commonly refer to as "countries" or "nations," such as Brazil, Italy, or China, are referred to as "states." This is not to be confused with the common use of the word "States" in the geography of the United States, which refers to geographic territories within the United States BACKGROUND: THE CHICAGO CONVENTION At its beginning in 1944, international civil aviation organization set forth aims and objectives in Article 44 as being to develop "the principles and techniques of international air navigation and to fos­ter the planning and development of international air transport." These aims and objectives, as found in Article 44 of the convention, were to: • Ensure the safe and orderly growth of international civil aviation throughout the world. • Encourage the arts of aircraft design and operation for peaceful purposes. • Encourage the development of airways, airports, and air navigation facilities for international civil aviation. • Meet the needs of the world's peoples for safe, regular, efficient, and eco­nomical air transport. • Prevent economic waste caused by unreasonable competition. • Ensure that the rights of Contracting States are fully respected and that every Contracting State has a fair opportunity to operate international airlines. • Avoid discrimination between Contracting States. • Promote safety of flight in international air navigation. • Promote the development of all aspects of international civil aeronautics. One of the goals of this conference was to obtain a uniformity in international regulations and standards that was previously lacking. Important work was accom­plished in the technical field because the Chicago Convention paved the way for a common air navigation system throughout the world. The major accomplishments of the Chicago Convention include the following: • The Convention on International Civil Aviation provided the basis for a coplete modernization of the basic public international law of the air. • Twelve technical annexes were drafted to cover the technical and operational aspects of international civil aviation such as airworthiness of aircraft, air traffic control, telecommunications, and air navigation services. • Regions and regional offices were established in specific areas where operating conditional and other relevant parameters were comparable. • At last, with the formation of ICAO, the international community of states had adopted a single unifying body. international civil aviation organization ORGANIZATION The International Civil Aviation Organization has its headquarters in the beauti­ful city of Montreal, Canada, as shown in Figure 5-1, with seven regional offices throughout the world. These regional offices are very important for coordinating international aviation policy and standards, especially in third world and develop­ing nations which do not have a modern aviation infrastructure. The seven international civil aviation organization regional offices are located as follows: • Bangkok, Thailand-Asia and Pacific office • Cairo, Egypt-Middle East office • Dakar, Senegal-Western and Central African office • Lima, Peru-South American office • Mexico City-North American, Central American, and Caribbean office • Nairobi, Kenya-Eastern and Southern African office • Paris, France-European and North Atlantic office The International Civil Aviation Organization is made up of three governing bodies: an Assembly, a Council, and a Secretariat. The chief officers of international civil aviation organization are the President of the Council and the Secretary General. The Assembly is the first, sovereign governing body of international civil aviation organization and meets every 3 years. ICAO's 191 member States and a large number of international organizations are invited to the Assembly which review the complete work of the organization in the economic, legal, and technical fields. Each state is entitled to one vote, and the decisions of the Assembly are decided by a majority of votes cast, except when otherwise provided for in the Convention. The ICAO's 39th triannual assembly was conducted from September 27 to October 7, 2016. The Council is the permanent, second governing body of ICAO, elected by the Assembly and composed of 36 Contracting States. The Assembly elects the council member States using three criteria: • States of chief importance in air transport • States which make the largest contribution to the provision of facilities for civil air navigation • States whose designation will ensure that all major areas of the world are repre­sented(geographic representation) As its primary governing body, the Council gives continuing direction to the work of ICAO. The primary focus is to adopt and incorporate international civil aviation organization Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs). Today, international civil aviation organization manages over 12,000 standard and recommended practices across the 19 annexes to the Convention. To develop SARPs, the Council is assisted by the Air Navigation Commission in technical matters, the Air Transport Committee in economic matters, and the Committee on Unlawful Interference in aviation security matters. The primary work of the Air Navigation Commission is to advise the Council on aviation navigation issues using international experts with appropriate quali­fications and experience in this area. It is important to note that these experts are expected to serve worldwide aviation interests and function independently, and not as representatives of their member States. The Secretariat is the third governing body of international civil aviation organization headed by the Secretary General and is divided into five main divisions or bureaus. An organization chart for the international civil aviation organization Secretariat is shown in Figures 5-2 and 5-3. Please see the international civil aviation organization Web site, www.icao.int, for the latest changes. The five bureaus are: • Air Navigation Bureau • Air Transport Bureau • Technical Cooperation Bureau• Legal Affairs and External Relations Bureau • Administration and Services Bureau Of these five bureaus, the Air Navigation Bureau (ANB) is by far the most important for the purposes of this text. The Standards (Rulemaking) process of international civil aviation organization area kept current by ANB through updating ICAO's governing document, the Annexes of the Chicago Convention. A Standard is defined as any specification for physical characteristics, configu­ration, material, performance, personnel, or procedure; the uniform application of which is recognized as necessary for the safety or regularity of international air navigation and to which Contracting States must conform in accordance with the Convention. In the event of the impossibility of compliance, notification to the Council is compulsory under Article 38 of the Chicago Convention. A Recommended Practice is any specification for physical characteristics, con­figuration, material, performance, personnel, or procedure; the uniform application of which is recognized as desirable in the interest of safety, regularity, or efficiency of international air navigation, and to which Contracting States will endeavor to conform in accordance with the Convention. Please note that States are merely invited to inform the Council of noncompliance. Standards and Recommended Practices are formulated in broad terms and restricted to essential requirements. For complex systems such as communications equipment, standard and recommended practices material is constructed in two sections: core SARPs-material of a fundamental regulatory nature contained within the main body of the Annexes, and detailed technical specifications- placed either in Appendices to Annexes or in manuals. Procedures for Air Navigation Services (or PANS) comprise operating practices and material too detailed for Standards and Recommended Practices-they often amplify the basic principles in the corresponding Standards and Recommended Practices. To qualify for PANS status, the material should be suitable for applica­tion on a worldwide basis. Regional Supplementary Procedures (or SUPPs) have application in the respective international civil aviation organization regions. Although the material in SUPPs is similar to that in the Procedures for Air Navigation Services, SUPPs do not have the worldwide applica­bility of PANS, and are adapted to suit the particular region of the world, through the international civil aviation organization regional offices. Additional Guidance Material is also produced to supplement the standard and recommended practices and PANS and to facilitate their implementation. Guidance material is issued as Attachments to Annexes or in separate documents such as manuals, circulars, and lists of designators/addresses. Usually such guidance is approved at the same time as the related standard and recommended practices are adopted. The establishment and maintenance of standard and recommended practices and PANS are fundamental tenets of the Chicago Convention and a core aspect of ICAO's mission and role. standard and recommended practices and PANS are critical because they provide the fundamental basis for harmonized global aviation safety, efficiency, and worldwide standardization of functional and performance requirements. Typically, it takes about 2 years for an initial proposal for a new or improved SARP or PAN to be formally adopted. The SARP process has been very effective in recent years for ensuring the safe, efficient, and orderly growth of international civil aviation. The reason for success in this area lies in the four "C's" of international civil aviation organization international aviation: Cooperation, Consensus, Compliance, and Commitment; that is, cooperation by member States in the for­mulation of SARPs, consensus in their approval, compliance in their application, and commitment of adherence to the ongoing process. Some definitions are helpful at this point to distinguish between these categories. Implementation Of Sarps/Universal Safety Oversight Aumt Program. Ensuring that each of the elements in the aviation system meets at least a minimum standard of safety is a key component of regulation at the state level. Under the Convention on International Civil Aviation, the implementation of standard and recommended practices lies with Contracting member States. This system has been successful for providing a safe commercial air transport system. To help states in the area of safety, in 1999 international civil aviation organization established a Universal Safety Oversight Audit Program. The Program consists of regular, mandatory, systematic, and harmonized safety audits carried out by international civil aviation organization in all Contracting States. The objective of the Safety Oversight Audit is to promote global aviation safety by determining the status of implementation of relevant international civil aviation organization SARPs, associ­ated procedures, and safety-related practices. The audits are conducted within the context of critical elements of a State's safety oversight system. These include the appropriate legislative and regulatory framework, a sound organizational structure, technical guidance, qualified personnel, licensing and certification procedures, con­tinued surveillance, and the resolution of identified safety concerns. NEw international civil aviation organization ANNEX 19, SAFETY MANAGEMENT During the international civil aviation organization High-level Safety Conference 2010, the development of an Annex dedicated exclusively to Safety Management was recommended. It was desirable to consolidate all safety requirements into one annex and elevate Safety Management Systems to the "Standard" level. The benefits of this approach include the following: • Address safety risks proactively. • Manage and support strategic regulatory and infrastructure developments. • Reinforce the role played by the State in managing safety at the State level, in coordination with service providers. • Stress the concept of overall safety performance in all domains. The Safety Management Systems (SMS) framework encompasses four compo­nents (Pillars) for the State Safety Program (SSP): 1. Safety policy and objectives 2. Safety risk management 3. Safety assurance 4. Safety promotion However, there is some inconsistency in the maturity level of state programs. Larger states may be able to invest significant resources into their safety management system programs, while this may not be possible for smaller states that are just now beginning to establish safety management programs at a national level. A small state does not necessarily have to have a large-scale program already in place to start a safety management program, as required by ICAO. Instead, smaller members of international civil aviation organization may: • Use published data on worldwide accidents and causal factors and consider how those many differ in their state. • Hold meetings to identify and find risks based on published data and according to safety managers at each air carrier. • Use free safety information available from several sources to implement state safety program regulatory programs. Additional information on the many benefits of safety management system will be provided in Chapter 12 of this book. international civil aviation organization WORLDWIDE SAFETY RATINGS In contrast to the controversy over who should regulate the safety for flight oper­ations, the United States acts as its own watchdog for ensuring other countries who want to operate within its borders comply with the safety standards estab­lished by ICAO. Under the International Aviation Safety Assessment (IASA), the federal aviation administration determines whether another country's oversight of its carriers operating or codesharing with the United States complies with Annex 1 (Personnel Licensing), Annex 6 (Operation of Aircraft), and Annex 8 (Airworthiness of Aircraft) to the Chicago Convention. For example, at the end of 2015, IASA downgraded Thailand's safety rating since it was not in compliance with international civil aviation organization safety stan­dards. At present, existing Thai air operators can still operate in the United States, but cannot provide new, additional services until they meet all international civil aviation organization safety requirements. THE FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA ) The Federal Aviation Administration is a U.S. government agency with primary responsibility for the safety of civil aviation. The FAA's major roles and responsi­bilities as stated on its Web site include: • Regulating civil aviation to promote safety. • Encouraging and developing civil aeronautics, including new aviation technology.• Developing and operating a system of air traffic control (ATC) and navigation for both civil and military aircraft. Figure 5-4 shows an air traffic controller at work. • Researching and developing the National Airspace System and civil aeronautics. • Developing and carrying out programs to control aircraft noise and other envi­ronmental effects of civil aviation. • Regulating U.S. commercial space transportation. BACKGROUND The federal aviation administration is responsible for performing several activities that are in support of the previously mentioned functions. These activities as reproduced from the federal aviation administration Web site include the following: • Safety regulation. The federal aviation administration issues and enforces regulations and minimum standards covering the manufacture, operation, and maintenance of aircraft. The agency is responsible for the rating and certification of airmen and airports serving air carriers. .• Airspace and air traffic management. The safe and efficient utilization of the nav­igable airspace is a primary objective of the FAA. The agency operates a network of airport towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight service stations. It develops air traffic rules, and assigns and controls the use of airspace. Air navigation facilities. The federal aviation administration is responsible for the construction and instal­lation of visual and electronic airborne integrated data system to air navigation and for the maintenance, operation, and quality assurance of these facilities. Other systems maintained in support of air navigation and air traffic control include voice/data communica­tions equipment, radar facilities, computer systems, and visual display equipment at flight service stations. • Civil aviation abroad. The federal aviation administration promotes aviation safety and encourages civil aviation abroad. Activities include exchanging aeronautical information with foreign authorities; certifying foreign repair shops, airmen, and mechanics; pro­viding technical airport information desk and training; negotiating bilateral airworthiness agreements; and taking part in international conferences. • Commercial space transportation. The agency regulates and encourages the U.S. commercial space transportation industry. It licenses commercial space launch facil­ities and private sector launching of space payloads on expendable launch vehicles. • Research, engineering, and development. The federal aviation administration does research on and devel­ops the systems and procedures needed for a safe and efficient system of air navigation and air traffic control. The agency supports development of improved aircraft, engines, and equipment. It also conducts aeromedical research and evaluations of items such as aviation systems, devices, materials, and procedures. • Other programs. The federal aviation administration provides a system for registering aircraft and record­ing documents affecting title or interest in aircraft and their components. Among other activities the agency administers an aviation insurance program, develops specifications for aeronautical charts, and publishes information on airways, airport services, and other technical subjects in aeronautics. federal aviation administration ORGANIZATION The largest agency of the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), the FAA, has authority to regulate and oversee all aspects of civil aviation with an annual budget around $ 1 6 billion. The FAA-stated mission is to provide the safest, most efficient aerospace system in the world. Its organizational chart is shown in Figures 5-5 and 5-6, split laterally down the middle in order to legibly fit on these pages. Please see the federal aviation administration Web site, www.faa.gov, for the latest information. HEADQUARTERS OFFICES OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR This office provides overall direction and super­vision of the Agency and reports directly to the Secretary of Transportation (DOT), a cabinet level position. Within this office is a Deputy Administrator Chief of Staff and the Audit and Evaluation Office. The primary federal aviation administration lines of business and major offices (www.faa.gov) include the following: 1. The Air Traffic Organization (ATO) is the operational arm of the FAA. It is responsible for providing safe and efficient air navigation services to 30.2 million square miles of airspace. This represents more than 1 7% of the world's airspace and includes all of the United States large portions of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, and the Gulf of Mexico. Its stakeholders are commercial and private aviation and the military, and its employees are the service providers-the 35,000 controllers, technicians, engineers, and support personnel whose daily efforts keep aircraft moving safely through the nation's skies. Mission Support • Management Services • Program Management Organization 2. Aviation Safety (AVS) is an organization responsible for the certification, pro­duction approval, and continued airworthiness of aircraft; certification of pilots, mechanics; and others in safety-related positions. Aviation Safety is also responsible for the following: • Certification of all operational and maintenance enterprises in domestic civil aviation • Certification and safety oversight of approximately 7,300 U.S. commercial air-lines and air operators • Civil flight operations • Developing regulations aviation safety offices and services include the following: • Flight Standards Service • Federal Air Surgeon • Quality, Integration, and Executive Service • Air Traffic Oversight • Rulemaking (discussed below) • Accident Investigation and Prevention • Aircraft Certification Service 3. Airports (ARP). The Airports organization provides leadership in planning and developing a safe and efficient national airport system. The office has responsibility for all programs related to airport safety and inspections and standards for airport design, construction, and operation (including international harmonization of airport standards). Each year, the office awards $3.5 billion in airport grants and approves passenger facility charge collections totaling $2 billion. The office also is responsible for national airport planning and environmental and social require­ ments and establishes policies related to airport rates and charges, compliance with grant assurances, and airport privatization. ARP major offices and services include the following: • Airport Safety and Standards • Airport Compliance and Management Analysis • Airport Planning and Programming 4. Office of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) (www.faa. gov/nextgen).As provided on the federal aviation administration web page, NextGen is a transformative change in the management and operation of how we fly, which will reduce delays, save fuel, and lower carbon emissions. This comprehensive initiative integrates new and existing technologies, including satellite navigation and advanced digital communications. Airports and aircraft in the U.S. National Airspace System (NAS) will be connected to NextGen's advanced infrastructure and will continually share information in real time to improve air transportation's safety, speed, efficiency, and environmental impacts. The combined initiatives that make up NextGen will provide a better travel experience. The NextGen Office coordinates NextGen initiatives, programs, and policy development across the various federal aviation administration lines of business and staff offices. The office also works with other U.S. federal and state government agencies, the FAA's inter­national counterparts, and members of the aviation community to ensure harmoni­zation of NextGen policies and procedures. 5. Primary federal aviation administration Technical Centers • William ]. Hughes Technical Center-Atlantic City, NJ • The federal aviation administration William J. Hughes Technical Center (commonly known as the federal aviation administration Tech Center) is the nation's premier air transportation system laboratory. The Technical Center's highly technical and diverse workforce conducts tests and evaluations, verification and validation, sustainment of the FAA's full spectrum of aviation systems, and develops scientific solutions to current and future air transportation safety challenges by conducting applied research and development. Technical Center engineers, scientists, mathematicians, and technical experts utilize a robust, one-of-a-kind, world class laboratory environment to identify integrated system solutions for the modernization and sustainment of the NAS, and for delivering NextGen operational capabilities. • Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center, Oklahoma City, OK • The Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center is one of the largest federal aviation administration centers in the country and home of the following offices: • federal aviation administration Logistic Center provides consulting, engineering, repair, distribution, and technical support for air traffic control services in the United States and 44 different countries. • federal aviation administration Academy is the principal training facility of the FAA. All federal aviation administration air traffic controllers receive their basic training at the Academy. • The Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI) is the medical certification, education, research, and occupational medicine wing of the federal aviation administration Office of Aerospace Medicine. Additional information on each of the offices together with their contacts is available on the current federal aviation administration Web site. Some of the office functions that are impor­tant to the scope and intent of this text will be discussed in greater detail through­out the book. federal aviation administration SAFETY INSPECTION PROGRAM Aviation safety depends in part on the quality and thoroughness of the airlines' maintenance programs and on oversight and surveillance by safety inspectors of the FAA. Even though the frequency of maintenance-related accidents has not increased since 1978, airline deregulation has been accompanied by increasing concern that maintenance standards might have been lowered at some carriers and that pressures of the marketplace might lead to unsafe operating practices. At the same time, deregulation has increased the stress on federal aviation administration inspection programs. The existing regulatory inspection program, with its local and regional structure, does not have sufficient flexibility to adapt to a dynamic industry environment. The 78 Flight Standards District Offices (FSDOs) nationwide handle the dual functions of safety inspection and advice for airlines. In addition to scheduled airline surveillance, the local offices are responsible for the safety inspections of nonscheduled air taxis and other operations, such as flight schools, engine over­haul shops, and private pilots. An air carrier's operating certificate is held at a specific flight standards office, typically the one nearest the carrier's headquarters or primary operations or maintenance base. For each carrier, a principal inspector is assigned to operations (flights, training, and dispatch), another is assigned to air­worthiness (maintenance), and a third may be assigned to avionics (navigation and communications equipment). For large airlines, each of the principal inspectors can have assistants. Local FSDOs conduct several types of inspections at each airline: an inspec­tion of maintenance functions and an inspection of operations. Inspectors periodically conduct maintenance-base inspections, which focus on the records kept by an airline. For example, records demonstrating that an airline has complied with airworthiness directives might be inspected. Inspectors conduct shop inspections to observe maintenance procedures and carry out ramp inspections to observe the air­worthiness of aircraft. A similar operations-base inspection focuses on records con­taining the hours of training provided, the checkrides performed for pilots, and the rest periods between duty shifts as required by regulations. Furthermore, en route inspections involve observations of actual flight operations, with the inspector riding in the jumpseat in the cockpit. Base inspections are preannounced. There is a tendency to focus on records rather than to probe deeply into the data underlying carrier records concerning maintenance, training, and flight crew logs. Inspectors at the local level try to work with air carriers to achieve compliance when they find discrepancies. Violations and fines are viewed as a last resort. Every major airline has a reliability program that monitors maintenance activi­ties and looks for emerging problems. This has been reinforced by the recent international civil aviation organization and federal aviation administration emphasis on SMS, which will be discussed later in this textbook. For example, most airlines monitor engine temperatures, oil consumption, and the metal content of oil. They then use these tests to determine when an individual engine needs to be overhauled or repaired. Some airlines also use statistical mea­sures such as the number of engines requiring premature overhaul, engines that are shut down in flight, the number of mechanical discrepancies that are left outstand­ing at flight time, and the rate at which these discrepancies are cleared. In some companies, analysts search for adverse trends that might indicate, for example, a shop procedure that needs to be revised, both to ensure safety and to reduce maintenance expense. Some FSDOs have taken advantage of these statistical data to monitor the effectiveness of airline maintenance. In some cases, flight standards inspectors have encouraged airlines to set up or expand their statistical reliability programs. AviATION SAFETY INSPECToR WoRKLOAD. The inspector workload has been affected greatly by airline deregulation. Whenever a new airline is formed, an airline has placed a new aircraft type into service, or two airlines have merged, flight stan­dards have been obliged to devote resources to certificating the new or changed air carrier. Certification involves page-by-page approval of the airline's operations and maintenance manuals, checkrides for the airline's senior pilots, and assessment of actual operations as a whole. Certification is an activity that competes for inspectors' time within the entire safety inspection program. Because it is a potential bottleneck in the establishment of new and changing airlines, requests for certification divert resources from other surveillance activity and usually bring pressure on the federal aviation administration to address the certifica­tion on a priority basis. Only after all certification requests have been fulfilled, any remaining inspector time is then devoted to surveillance. The situation has improved in recent years. However, the large number of air­line mergers has affected the flight standards personnel in a unique way. When air­lines merge, the acquired carrier often is kept intact as an operating entity. Such a situation often creates complications due to differences in aircraft types, crew training, and maintenance programs. Consequently, the federal aviation administration inspection force assigned to the acquiring carrier might become responsible for the operations of a carrier that is much different and is located in another region. Since principal inspectors may then be far away from large operational components of the newly merged airline, there is a greater dependence on inspections by the federal aviation administration offices that happen to be near the remote components. Such offices often bear the burden of perform­ing the inspections after mergers. Inspections performed by one office on another office's carrier are called geographic inspections by the FAA. federal aviation administration RULEMAKING Over the past 50 years, numerous reports have documented the delays in the federal aviation administration rulemaking process. There is no question that rulemaking is extremely time­consuming and complex, requiring careful consideration of the impact of proposed rules on the public, aviation industry, the economy, and the environment. The U.S. Government Accountability Office has reported that after formally initiating a rule, the federal aviation administration took an average of 30 months to complete the rulemaking, and 20% of the rules took over 10 years or longer to complete In recent years, difficult rulemaking issues such as changes to the Airline Transport Pilot qualifications and the operation of small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS or drones) have taken several years to develop. Often it takes public outcry and political pressure to move the process forward such as seen in the wake of the Colgan Air Commuter flight crash in Buffalo, New York, in February 2009. In general, all government administrative rulemaking is governed under the Administrative Procedures Act (APA), which requires advance notice and opportunity for the public and industry to comment before a rule is issues or amended. Under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, the federal aviation administration obtains advice and recom­mendations from industry concerning the full range of its rulemaking activity, including all aviation-related issues such as air carrier operations, airman and air­craft certification, airports, and noise abatement. The primary committee chartered by the federal aviation administration for this purpose is called the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) whose primary purpose is to provide the public an earlier opportunity to participate in the federal aviation administration rulemaking process before the formal APA notification period begins. Steps In The Formal Rulemaking Process. The formal federal aviation administration rulemaking procedures are provided in Question and Answer format in 14 code of federal regulations Part 1 1 . A diagram of the FAA's process is provided in Figure 5-7. Most analysts of the federal aviation administration rulemaking process agree that the area most in need of improvement is that of timeliness in identifying and responding to safety issues. Critics complain that excessive delays in the rulemaking process complicate new or amended certification programs and make them more costly. They complain of excessive rewriting and divergent rules for different aircraft categories when such rules should be identical. Some critics blame the Office of the Secretary of Transportation and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for much of the delay. The problem of rulemaking delay seems to lie with the whole process, not just the DOT, the OMB, or the FAA. In any case, most analysts agree that the rulemak­ing process needs to be streamlined. The essential steps in developing sound public safety policy must be identified, and the rest eliminated. Dual Mandate For Commercial Space Operations. When the federal aviation administration was established, its jurisdiction for rulemaking included promoting both the growth of industry and safety. As the industry grew, though, the federal aviation administration eventually moved toward focusing solely on safety. However, a similar dual mandate has appeared again due to a new industry that is emerging and which also has close ties to the FAA: commer­cial space operations. Once again, the federal aviation administration is responsible for promoting space­flight operations and overseeing its safety. Under the Office of Commercial Space Transportation (FAA-AST), regulations are being created to ensure protection of the public, property, and national security and foreign policy interests of the United States during commercial launch or reentry activities, and to encourage, facilitate, and promote U.S. commercial space transportation. AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES When the need arises, the federal aviation administration releases airworthiness directives. These notices are legally enforceable rules that aim to correct an unsafe condition that arise in a par­ticular model of aircraft, engine, avionics, or any other system in the airplane that needs to be corrected. For example, in April 2016 the federal aviation administration issued an airworthiness directive requiring Boeing 787 operators to update flight manuals due to the preva­lence of bad airspeed data. The federal aviation administration made this move after there had been three reports of airspeed anomalies. In each reported case, the displayed airspeed rapidly dropped significantly below the actual airplane airspeed. The directive warned the pilots not to use abrupt control inputs in case of erroneous airspeed indications, since such inputs at high speeds could structurally damage the aircraft, and also to disconnect the autopilot before making any manual flight control inputs. A current list of federal aviation administration Airworthiness Directives can be found on its Website. Example Of federal aviation administration Rulemaking Process: The ATP-CTP To better understand the regulatory system of the government, it is helpful to illustrate an example of the federal aviation administration rulemaking process in action. One of the worst aviation accidents in recent U.S. history happened in February 2009 when a Bombardier Dash-8 Q400 operating as Colgan Air Flight 3407 crashed near Buffalo, New York, killing all 49 passengers and crew. In the aftermath of the tragedy, the family of the victims campaigned to set higher industry standards for airline pilots. After intense lobbying from the victim's family and other legislative pres­sures, in 2010 the U.S. Congress passed a bill titled the Airline Safety and Federal Administration Extension Act of 2010 that required first officers (copilots) oper­ating aircraft under federal aviation administration code of federal regulations Part 121 to hold an Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) certificate. This bill was signed into law as Public Law 1 1 1-2 1 6, and airlines were given until August 2013 to comply with the new provision. Up until that time, first officers of such aircraft were only required to possess a commercial pilot certifi­cate, which has lower flight time requirements than an airline transport pilot certificate. Before bringing this regulation into effect, the federal aviation administration Advisory and Rulemaking Committee drafted a report that identified a knowledge and flight experience gap stating that the quantity of training does not necessarily equal quality of training. From these findings, Public-Law 1 1 1-216 was created. It was broken down into two parts: • Section 21 6. This set the requirement for federal aviation administration to complete rulemaking to require all Part 121 pilots to hold an airline transport pilot certificate and have a set amount of multien­gine flight time. • Section 21 7. Under this section, the federal aviation administration would create regulations for revising the requirements for the airline transport pilot certificate and allow a reduction to the 1,500-hour airline transport pilot requirement for a pilot who had received certain academic coursework. The federal aviation administration then published Public Law 1 1 1-16 for public comment. It elicited more than 550 comments, 120 of which were specific to the ATP-CTP before being made a final rule. The timeline below gives insight into the lengthy process and the pace for the changes: • February 2009. Colgan Air Flight 3407 accident. • February 201 0. Advance notice about a regulation change for first officers. • July 201 0. Aviation rulemaking committee was formed to investigate current requirements for first officers. August 2010. Law 111-216 was published regarding changes that would be made to current requirements. • February 2012. The federal aviation administration released a notice for proposed rulemaking to solicit public comments about the proposed changes. • July 15, 2013. Final ruling went into effect. Some industry and union groups have expressed concern that the changes required by this legislation have created a pilot shortage at the regional airline level because it significantly increased the amount of flight time pilots must have before making the next step in their career and joining the airline industry. While previously pilots could become an airline first officer as long as they had 250 hours of flight experience and a commercial pilot's certificate, now the increase in hours required to 1 ,500 imposes a significantly longer time during which pilots must accrue much more flight experience prior to being accepted to fly for the airlines. This delay can be several years' worth of time, often spent flight instructing or in some other time building endeavor, in order to reach the required 1 ,500 hours. Some regional airlines have even made the bold claim that they have been unable to staff the flight schedule with pilots and, as a consequence, have had to cancel flights and park aircraft. There are special provisions in the new regulations that do provide some relief to the increased flight hour requirements. Pilots who have met certain rigorous requirements following FAA-approved curricula at certain aviation universities or similar institutions of higher learning may have the required time reduced from 1 ,500 flight hours to 1 ,000 flight hours. This provision requires a minimum of 60 academic credits in aviation courses, 200 hours of cross-country flight time, and obtaining one's instrument rating and commercial pilot's license at the same institution, plus completion of a special Air Transport Pilot Certification Training Program (ATP-CTP) that includes 6 hours of training in Level C or D (full motion) simulators. RECENT federal aviation administration REGULATORY DEVELOPMENTS FAIR TREATMENT oF ExPERIENCED PILOTS Acr. Since 1959, the federal aviation administration had set an age limit of 60 for pilots operating under FAR Part 1 2 1 . This was known as the "Age 60 retirement rule." However, in November 2006, international civil aviation organization raised the maximum age for certain pilots in international operations from age 60 to 65. Following this change, the Fair Treatment of Experienced Pilots Act went into effect in 2007, mandat­ing retirement of pilots at age 65. This limit though, only applies to FAR Part 121 operations, leaving open the debate open for whether or not FAR Part 135 operations should also follow this rule. New Fucht And Duty Time Rest Requirements. In January 2012 the federal aviation administration created FAR Part 117 entitled, "Flight and Duty Time Limitations and Rest Requirements," which replaced previous similar regulations for FAR Part 121 airline passenger operations. This rule was the first major revision to duty and rest guidance in 60 years. After many years of research and work to improve commercial aviation safety, the rule was passed to prevent fatigue and enforce compliance with manda­tory pilot rest periods. It recognizes that universal factors cause fatigue and regu­lates these factors to mitigate its effects through a new Fatigue Risk Management System. Part 117's underlying philosophy is that there is no single component that buffers the risk of fatigue to an acceptable level, rather a system approach must be adopted that makes both the carrier and crewmembers responsible for protect­ing everyone against the risks of fatigue. Unlike the ATP-CTP requirement that was previously discussed, the foundation of FAR Part 117 is rooted in science. Extensive research was conducted to examine circadian rhythms and how they have an effect on flying performance. The new rule provides the following: • Establishes varying flight and duty requirements based on what time the pilot's day begins. • Stipulates the flight duty period, otherwise known as the allowable length of a work period as a function of when the day commences and the number of flight segments expected to be flown. This period ranges from 9 to 14 hours for single crew operations. • Establishes flight time limits of 8 or 9 hours, depending on the start time of the pilot's entire flight duty period. • Sets a minimum 1 0-hour rest period prior to a flight's duty period, which is 2 more hours than the previous rule, and which also requires that 8 of the hours provide for uninterrupted sleep. • Sets new requirements to address cumulative flight duty and flight time limits for each 28-day period. This also requires that pilots have at least 30 consecutive hours free from duty on a weekly basis, which is 25% more than the previous rule provided. OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (OSHA ) BACKGROUND The Occupational Safety and Health Administration Act of 1970 (OSHA Act) cre­ated a new organization under the U.S. Secretary of Labor. The mission of occupational safety and health administration is to ensure safe and healthful working conditions for working men and women by setting and enforcing standards, and by providing training, outreach, education, and assistance. The occupational safety and health administration Act covers all employers and employees who do business in the United States, except workplaces already protected by other federal agencies under other federal statutes. This means that OSHA's jurisdiction does not extend into the aircraft, but it does apply to all ground, ramp, and airport maintenance operations. Figure 5-8 shows a spray painter applying a primer on an aircraft part in preparation for painting. As can be seen, the painter is wearing goggles and a respirator assembly for protection from fumes. This protective equipment illustrates some of the requirements stipulated by occupational safety and health administration to keep the workforce free of injury. occupational safety and health administration ORGANIZATION Figure 5-9 shows the most recent organizational chart available for occupational safety and health administration to include depiction of the different directorates, regional offices, and responsible officials. The figure makes for a handy reference when reviewing the organizational elements of this agency. For current information, please visit the occupational safety and health administration Web site at www.osha.gov. occupational safety and health administration RULEMAKING Occupational Safety and Health Administration can initiate new standards on its own or if petitioned by other parties of relevance such as the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS), the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), state and local governments, or any nationally recognized standards-producing organization. NIOSH is the U.S. federal agency responsible for conducting research and making recommendations for the prevention of work­related injury and illness. NIOSH is part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. As the basic research arm of OSHA, NIOSH may also make recommenda­tions to modify and/or promulgate standards. This agency conducts research and provides technical assistance to occupational safety and health administration and industry on various safety and health hazards. During the course of its research, NIOSH may conduct workplace investi­gations, gather testimony from employers and employees, and require that employ­ers measure and report employee exposure to potentially hazardous materials. NIOSH also may require employers to provide medical examinations and tests to determine the incidence of occupational illness among employees. occupational safety and health administration STANDARDS AFFECTING AviATION OPERATIONs: ExAMPLES During OSHA's near half century of existence, the agency has helped to save many thousands of lives and reduce occupational injury and illness rates by more than half. Although highlighting major developments would exceed the purview of this book, what follows is a short list of aviation-related examples of occupational safety and health administration standards. • May 29, 1971 . Comprehensive standards were first adopted to provide a baseline for safety and health protection in occupational environments. Sample avia­tion operations that are regulated include aircraft manufacturing and assembly, hangar and other maintenance shop operations, painting and stripping, ramp and flight line operations, baggage handling, cleaning crew activities, and airport operations. • November 14, 1978. The lead standard was introduced to protect workers from occupational exposure to lead, an element that is known to cause damage to human nervous, urinary, and reproductive systems. Aviation applications of this standard include battery maintenance and aircraft painting and stripping. • March 6, 1 989. The hazardous waste operations and emergency response stan­dard (HAZWOPER) was promulgated to protect 1 .75 million public and private sector workers exposed to toxic wastes from spills or at hazardous waste sites. Aircraft refueling, battery maintenance and disposal, deicing operations, and manufacturing process discharges are covered by this standard. • December 6, 1991 . The bloodborne pathogens standard was introduced to prevent occupational exposure to AIDS, hepatitis B, and other infectious diseases. Flight attendants, safety investigators, baggage and cargo handlers, aircraft cleanup crew, and high-exposure-potential manufacturing and assembly jobs are covered by this standard. At the very least, employees in these positions require basic training on exposure prevention to blood and other potentially infectious material. • January 14, 1 993. The confined spaces (and permit-required confined spaces) standard was promulgated to prevent more than 50 deaths and more than 5,000 serious injuries annually. Employees who perform maintenance and fabrication work in elevators, bulkheads, and cargo holds are covered by this standard. Manufacturing facilities requiring employees to enter and work in spaces that have a limited means of entry, can engulf the employee, and are not designed for normal continuous work are covered by this standard. • November 14, 2000. The ergonomics program standard was initiated to prevent a painful and debilitating category of musculoskeletal injuries that affect more than 102 million workers. These injuries develop from jobs requiring excessive repetitive motion and/or high forceful applications and/or awkward postures. Sample aviation jobs that could lead to repetitive-motion injuries are those per­formed by flight attendants, baggage handlers, data entry personnel, and aircraft assembly workers. Although this standard was repealed by Congress in March 200 1 , OSHA's "Effective Ergonomic Strategies for Success" program remains viable in today's workplace. • In March 2012, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) revised its Hazard Communication Standard to align it with the United Nations Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS), Revision 3. The revision to the Hazard Communication Standard (HCS) built on the existing standard, by requiring chemical manufacturers and importers to follow specific criteria when evaluating the hazardous chemicals and when communicating the hazards through labels and safety data sheets (SDSs). For additional information on occupational safety and health administration and its applicable regulations please refer to www.osha.gov. THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA ) BACKGROUND On December 2, 1970, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was estab­lished in the Executive Branch of government as an independent agency. The EPA was created to enable coordinated and effective government action on behalf of the environment. The agency strives to abate and control pollution systematically by integrating a variety of research, monitoring, standard setting, and enforce­ment activities. To complement its other activities, EPA coordinates and supports research and antipollution activities by state and local governments, private and public groups, individuals, and educational institutions. As stated on its Web site, the primary mission of the EPA is to protect human health and the environment. Going a bit deeper, the EPA's stated purpose is to ensure the following: • All Americans are protected from significant risks to human health and the envi­ronment where they live, learn, and work. • National efforts to reduce environmental risk are based on the best available sci­ entific information. • Federal laws protecting human health and the environment are enforced fairly and effectively. • Environmental protection is an integral consideration in U.S. policies concerning natural resources, human health, economic growth, energy, transportation, agri­culture, industry, and international trade, and these factors are similarly consid­ered in establishing environmental policy. • All parts of society-communities, individuals, businesses, and state, local, and tribal governments-have access to accurate information sufficient to effectively participate in managing human health and environmental risks. EPA ORGANIZATION AND MAJOR OFFICES OFFICE oF THE ADMINISTRATOR. This office provides overall direction and supervi­sion of the Agency and reports directly to the President of the United States. The Office of the EPA Administrator includes Children's Health Protection, Civil Rights, Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations, Public Engagement and Environmental Education, and the Science Advisory Board among others. OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATION AND RESOURCES MANAGEMENT. This office is responsible for national leadership, policy, and procedures governing administrative services and human resources. OmcE or AIR AND RADIATION. This office develops national programs, policies, and regulations for controlling air pollution and radiation exposure. This office is responsible for administering the Clean Air Act, the Atomic Energy Act, and other applicable environmental laws. OFFICE oF CHEMICAL SAFETY AND POLLUTION PREVENTION. This office is responsible for protecting the environment from potential risks from pesticides, as well as toxic chemicals, and also works to prevent pollution before it begins. It implements and monitors regulatory activities relating to the following laws: • Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act • Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act • Toxic Substances Control Act • Pollution Prevention Act OFFICE oF ENFORCEMENT AND CoMPLIANCE AssuRANCE. This office is the regulatory enforce­ment wing of the EPA and advises the EPA Administrator on matters concerning administrative, civil, and criminal enforcement; environmental-equity efforts; and compliance monitoring and assurance activities. There is also a strong focus on environmental justice by protecting vulnerable communities. OFFICE oF ENviRoNMENTAL INFoRMATION. Headed by the Chief Information Officer, this office manages the life cycle of information to support EPA's mission of protect­ing human health and the environment. It identifies and implements information technology and information management solutions; ensures the quality of EPA's information and the efficiency and reliability of EPA's technology, data collection, and exchange efforts; and access services. OmcE OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. Science at EPA provides the foundation for credible decision making to safeguard human health and ecosystems from environ­mental pollutants. This office is the scientific research arm of EPA, whose leading­edge research helps provide the solid underpinning of science and technology for the Agency. The work at EPA research and development laboratories, research cen­ters, and offices across the country helps improve the quality of air, water, soil, and the way resources are utilized. OmcE oF WATER. Office of Water ensures drinking water is safe and restores and maintains oceans, watersheds, and their aquatic ecosystems to protect human health, support economic and recreational activities, and provide healthy habitat for fish, plants, and wildlife. There are 10 EPA Regional Offices (States Covered) and Office Locations: • Region 1 (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT), Boston • Region 2 (N], NY, PR, and VI), New York • Region 3 (DE, MD, PA, VA, WV, DC), Philadelphia • Region 4 (AL, FL, GA, KY, MS, NC, SC, TN), Atlanta • Region 5 (IL, IN, MI, MN, OH, WI), Chicago • Region 6 (AR, LA, NM, OK, TX), Dallas • Region 7 (lA, KS, MO, NE), Kansas City • Region 8 (CO, MT, ND, SD, UT, WY), Denver • Region 9 (AZ, CA, HI, NV, and U.S. Pacific Islands), San Francisco • Region 1 0 (AK, ID, OR, WA), Seattle EPA RuLEMAKING The EPA rulemaking process is similar to the one described under occupational safety and health administration rulemak­ing. Initially, an authorized agency such as the EPA decides that a regulation may be needed. The Agency then researches the need for the regulation and proposes it, if needed. The proposal is listed in the Federal Register, and comments are invited from members of the public. The Agency reviews all comments, makes changes where appropriate, and issues a final rule. During the standards development process, all information regarding the original proposal, requests for public comment, notices about meetings (time and place) for public discussions, and the text of the final regulation is pub­lished in the Federal Register. Biannually, the Agency publishes a report that documents its efforts on all the regulations it is working on or has recently fin­ished. Environmental regulations appear in Title 40 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Major Environmental Laws Affecting Aviation Although highlighting major developments would exceed the purview of this book, what follows is an aviation-related subset of major EPA laws and regulations. National Environmental Policy Act (Nepa). The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) was passed in 1969 and was significant in that it was among the first laws to establish a broad national framework for protecting the environment. NEPA's fundamental policy was to make certain that all branches of government gave care­ful consideration to the environment before any major federal undertaking such as airports, military complexes, highways, parkland purchases, and other federal activities that are proposed. The Act requires Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Environmental Impact Statements (EISs) on the impact of all major undertak­ings and alternative courses of action on the environment. CLEAN AIR Acr (CAA). The Clean Air Act (CAA) was passed in 1970 and regulates air emissions from area, stationary, and mobile sources. In recent years, global climate change has become a significant issue, and aircraft emissions have become important to the environmental movement. Aircraft are producers of "greenhouse gases," that is, compounds that trap the Sun's heat within the Earth's climate. The EPA has the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions under the Clean Air Act, or Congress could address aviation legislation through modification of cap-and-trade or carbon tax proposals. Foreign countries, and, particularly, the European Union, have attempted to control aviation emissions as well. In August 2016, the EPA proposed to find whether greenhouse gas emissions from certain classes of engines used in aircraft contribute to the air pollution that causes climate change endangering public health and welfare. In this era of "global warming," aviation greenhouse gas emissions will remain an issue for the foreseeable future. CLEAN WATER AcT (CWA). The Clean Water Act (CWA), in its original and modified forms, gave the EPA the authority to implement pollution control programs such as setting wastewater standards for industry and water quality standards for sur­face waters. Under the Act, it was unlawful for anyone to discharge pollutants into navigable waters, unless a permit was obtained. It also established grants to fund the construction of sewage treatment plants. Such requirements require significant attention by airport managers, particularly with regards to the proper collection and treatment of used aircraft deicing and anti-icing fluid. Resource Conservation And Recovery Act (Rcra). This Act by far is the most far reaching of all EPA laws and is of major importance to the aviation industry. By virtue of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) of 1976, the EPA has the authority to control hazardous waste from "cradle to grave." This cradle­to-grave approach governs all phases of the waste from generation and transpor­tation through treatment, storage, and disposal. Hazardous wastes can be solids, liquids, or contained gaseous materials that could pollute the environment. Sources of hazardous wastes in aviation operations include the following: • Painting, degreasing, and cleaning of aircraft generate paint wastes, phenols, organic solvents, acids, and alkalis. • Plating, stripping, rust prevention, and stain removal generate cyanides chro­mium, and other toxic metals. • Spills and leaks from fuel systems and storage tanks generate fuels, oils, and grease. • Spent or leaking batteries from aircraft, air traffic control tower backup, and other power supply sources generate toxic {lead, lithium, nickel, and cadmium) and reactive (acid) wastes. Miscellaneous wastes include glycol used for deicing and other detergents. RCRA focuses only on active and future facilities and does not address abandoned or historical sites. Historical and abandoned sites are addressed by Cercla. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, And Liability Act (Cercla) Or " Superfund" . The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) or "Superfund" provided broad federal powers to respond directly to releases or potential releases of hazardous chemicals that posed risks to public health or the environment. The Act established requirements concerning closed and abandoned hazardous waste sites and provided for liability of individuals responsible for contaminating sites with hazardous wastes. The Act also gave EPA the power to seek out the parties that were responsible for the pollution and force them to clean up. Finally, this Act created a tax on the chemi­cal and petroleum industries to generate funds to provide for cleanup when a respon­sible party could not be identified. Hence this Act is also known as the Superfund. Sample applications of this law would be to aircraft burial (retirement) sites and old (discontinued) fuel dumping/storage facilities involving underground fuel storage. Superfund Amendments And Reauthorization Act (Sara). As a result of the complex administering requirements of Superfund, changes and additions were made to the program which resulted in the enactment of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986. Several site-specific amendments, definitions, clarifications, and technical requirements were added to the legislation, includ­ing additional enforcement authorities. The size of the fund was increased to $8.5 billion to pay for cleanup activities around the country. Some of the other salient features of the Act were that it required states to get involved in all phases of the Superfund program, stressed human health concerns posed by hazardous waste sites, and encouraged greater community involvement in the site cleanup decision­making process. OIL PoLLUTION AcT (OPA). The Oil Pollution Act (OPA) of 1990 was adopted after the highly publicized Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989, where up to 3 8 million U.S. gallons of crude oil were spilled in Alaska when an oil tanker struck a reef. The act was passed to strengthen EPA's ability to prevent and respond to catastrophic oil spills. A trust fund, financed by a tax on oil, was established to clean up spills when the responsible party was unable or unwilling to do so. Oil storage facilities and transport vessel operators are required to submit detailed plans to the federal gov­ernment on how they will manage large-scale inadvertent discharges. The EPA also has specific requirements for aboveground storage facilities. This regulation applies to aviation fueling and storage operations. The EPA has jurisdiction for inland oil spills, and the U.S. Coast Guard responds in coastal waters. The Oil Pollution Act became very important to the U.S. government in the wake of the British Petroleum Oil Rig disaster that occurred in the Gulf of Mexico near the mouth of the Mississippi River in Louisiana in 2010. The Oil Pollution Act of 1990 provides that the responsible party must pay for oil spill damages, and British Petroleum agreed to establish a $20 billion trust fund to pay for these dam­ages. The cataclysmic nature of the BP oil spill damage to the Gulf Coast region will ensure that public scrutiny is applied to any oil spills, including those related to aviation, for years to come. NoisE CoNTROL Acr (NCA). In the past, the EPA coordinated all federal noise control activities through its Office of Noise Abatement and Control. However, in 1 9 8 1 , the Administration at that time concluded that noise issues were best handled at the State or local government level. This area is improving through effective airport departure noise abatement procedures that provide guidance to pilots on flight profiles and operating processes to minimize the amount of noise that is created during approach and departure. Regarding future noise reduction, in February 2013, the ICAO's Committee on Aviation Environmental Protection (CAEP) agreed to a new global noise reduc­tion standard. The federal aviation administration participates in the international civil aviation organization CAEP meetings and supports this new standard. The most beneficial area of future noise reduction is future engine technology development to reduce source noise. NextGen air traffic control procedures will also improve aircraft noise pollution in the years to come. The impact of aircraft noise can be extremely invasive in everyday life and can result in disrupted sleep cycles, productivity, and safety problems associated with fatigue. Figure 5-10 shows a Boeing 747-400 on approach to a runway near a resi­dential area. For additional information on EPA and its applicable regulations please refer to www.epa.gov. aviation safety report system EXAMPLE Even though the federal aviation administration aims to create regulations that will improve working conditions for everyone working in the aviation field, sometimes the new rules cause controversy. Below is a submission to the aviation safety report system from a pilot who thinks the implementation of FAR 117 has done more harm than good in its attempt to help manage fatigue. Pilot Warns About Fa Tigue On departure, I missed a couple air traffic control radio calls. They were normal clearance calls and not urgent, but I just plain missed the calls. I also noticed that air traffic control communications with multiple instructions (heading, altitude, frequency, etc.) were difficult to mentally process and read back. I feel I was suffering the effect of accumulated fatigue. When we got to cruise, I tried to move around and get the "blood flowing," had a bite to eat and was able to complete my duties as pilot not flying for the duration of the flight. I noticed on the radio that many other "company" call signs were also completely missing radio calls and miss­repeating clearances. These were call signs that I could distinctly hear and all of them were having difficulty with air traffic control of one kind or another and making mistakes. As the night progressed, I heard at least two times of air traffic control trying to contact "company" flights multiple times with no response. The Captain and I discussed the issues at length during cruise. Both of us admit­ted to being more generally tired (on and off duty) than ever before in our careers. In all of our conversations with other pilots we are hearing the same story of being "beat," "exhausted," "tired,' 'worn out" and even the dreaded "fatigued." The general consensus is that our work schedules have gotten so bad that we are unable to rest and recover when home or off duty. It is common to hear pilots complain that it feels like they are never home any more. First let me say that I am no slouch. I believe in doing an honest day's work for an honest day's pay and have worked hard all my life. Since the advent of FAR 117 and Company schedule changes, the pairings and monthly schedules out of my domicile have progressively gotten worse. These abuses of an airline­favorable regulation (1 1 7) and the perceived dumping of a lot of "bad" flying on my domicile appears to be taking a toll after 5 months of accumulation. Myself and all pilots I speak with agree that an accident is not a matter of "if," but of "when." From what I heard on the radio on this night, the "when" may be soon. For the first time in my career, I legitimately know what fatigue feels like. For the first time in my career, I am legitimately afraid of putting my loved ones on our planes. FAR 117 needs to be reviewed now that we are six months in. From all pilots' point of view, it has made things far worse than they have ever been before. We are ALL more tired and burned out (including our off-duty lives) than ever before. Company schedule creation policy needs to be reviewed. Domicile schedules have continued to erode over the last several years. It is finally taking its toll and starting to catch up with all of us. Company crew accommodations policy needs to be reviewed. Pilots generally agree that the quality of crew accommodations has eroded in line with the pairings. It is getting more difficult to get a good rest and almost as importantly a good healthy meal at many of the hotels in which we are now being placed and this is contribut­ing to overall fatigue. Is it going to take an accident to fix these issues? Discussion Question for the reader: what action should the federal aviation administration and airlines take, if any, based on this report? CONCLUSION The role of government may seem to be a tedious subject to most aviation opera­tional personnel, but it is very important to a serious student of commercial avia­tion safety. To ensure the safety of our skies it takes continuous dedicated effort by many people across a large number of organizations. The task alone is too daunting to be handled solely by one interest group. Each group involved in the process has its own structure and rulemaking process to meet the needs of issues they are addressing. Due to the complexity of the subject matter, challenges do arise when collaborating on rules and regulations. Commercial aviation safety has been greatly improved due to the dedicated work of government regulating agencies that make safety procedures mandatory. Figure 51 1 shows the very first official flight of the U.S. Airmail Service in 1918 . One cannot help but wonder if these people had any idea of the huge aviation industry that would develop in the years to come. Over the past century since the picture was taken, government regulators across the globe have weaved a complex web of regulations which, when properly followed, are extremely critical to the safe operation of commercial aircraft. Perhaps the most significant take-away from this chapter is that government rulemaking and policy must be based on science, not emotion. When we approach rulemaking with an emotional lens, it often detracts from rules that may have the largest positive impact. The aviation industry always strives to operate in the safest possible manner, and the role of government is a critical part of this effort. The example of the development of the ATP-CTP licensing rules provides ample exposure to the government rulemaking process. The role of government is important, but it is only one weapon in our continuing mission to ensure the safety of commercial aviation operations. KEY TERMS Air Navigation Capacity and Efficiency Air Traffic Organization (ATO)Air Transport Pilot Certification Training Program (ATP-CTP) Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) Aviation Safety (AVS) Blood Priority Bloodborne Pathogens Standard hicago Convention Clean Air Act (CAA) Clean Water Act (CWA) Commercial Space Transportation Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) or Superfund Economic Development of Air Transport Environmental Protection Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) FAR Part 1 1 7 FAR Part 121 FAR Part 135 Fatigue Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Flight Standards District Offices (FSDOs) Flight Standards Service Hazard Communication Standard Hazardous Wa ste Operations and Emergency Response Standard (HAZWOPER) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) Noise Abatement and Control Occupational Safety and Health Administration Act of 1970 Oil Pollution Act (OPA) Procedures for Air Navigation Services (PANS) Regional Supplementary Procedures (SUPPs) Research, Engineering, and Development Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Security and Facilitation Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) REVIEW QUESTIONS 1. List three strategic objectives of international civil aviation organization and discuss their importance in international aviation. 2. State the purpose and name one result of the Chicago Convention of 1944. 3. Discuss the international civil aviation organization Rulemaking Process including the role of SARPs, PANS, and SUPPs. 4. Why does it take about 2 years for new guidance to be formulated through the international civil aviation organization Preliminary Review by the ANC? 5. List three major functions of the federal aviation administration and discuss some of the activities that support these functions. 6. How has inspector workload been affected since airline deregulation? Why has it been difficult attracting inspectors to major metropolitan areas? 7. Explain the evolution of the EPA. 8. Highlight the major environmental acts relevant to aviation, giving examples of each. 9. Explain the evolution of OSHA. 10. Provide examples of how occupational safety and health administration and the EPA impact aviation.