Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The Report of the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process. March 2002 US Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration March 14, 2002 Federal Aviation Administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification 800 Independence Avenue, S.W.Washington, DC 20591 Dear Mr. Sabatini, It is a pleasure to forward the team’s report, Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study – An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The main objective of this evaluation was to identify opportunities for process improvements, and I am confident that this study has met that goal. The findings and observations contained in this document should form the basis for additional efforts, enabling a remarkable safety system to become even better. In the course of this year’s work, the team and I have frequently remarked on how successful the vast majority of today’s processes and procedures are in accomplishing their safety objectives. This does not imply that there are not areas that could be improved upon, and this study identifies some of them. However, I suggest that as we move forward with the identification and implementation of improvements, due consideration should be given to the complex interrelationship among these many successful processes that already exist. Thank you for the opportunity to chair and lead this team. It was a pleasure to work with such tal-ented and professional individuals, both from government and private sectors. I look forward to con-tinuing to support this effort. Respectfully,Daniel Cheney Chairman Executive Summary Introduction The safety of large transport airplanes operating in commercial service throughout the world has improved over the last several decades. Recently, this rate of improvement has slowed, as many of the major, high-impact safety improvements have been developed and implemented by the industry. However, several recent accidents have highlighted the complex nature of accident prevention and the importance of understanding and improving the processes associated with the certification, operations, and maintenance of airplanes. In 1998, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) implemented the Safer Skies initiative, the goal of which was to reduce the US commercial fatal accident rate by 80 percent by 2007. This initiative has focused on using data to understand the root causes of aviation accidents and incidents in order to identify and apply intervention strategies. As a complement to the Safer Skies initiative and to address the role that processes play in accident prevention, the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification chartered the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study (CPS) in January 2001. The team was led by the FAA, co-chaired by industry, and comprised of technical experts from the FAA, the US aviation industry, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Department of Defense (DoD), and Sandia National Laboratories, as well as representatives from a major non-US manufacturer and a non-US independent airworthiness consultant. The team was chartered to conduct a comprehensive review of the processes and procedures associated with aircraft certification, operations, and maintenance, starting with the original type certification activities and extending through the continued operational safety and airworthiness processes intended to maintain the safety of the US commercial airplane fleet in service.The CPS team accomplished a detailed analysis of the various processes, relationships, and life-cycle considerations. The CPS team identified five primary focus areas to group their findings and observations.• Airplane Safety Assurance Processes• Aviation Safety Data Management• Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces• Major Repair and Modification• Safety Oversight ProcessesThe CPS effort focused on certification, operations, and maintenance processes, and the information paths between them, as depicted in Figure 1. Of special interest were the content and effectiveness of the information paths between certification and operations and maintenance activities (the arrows). Findings and observations were continuously reviewed against this diagram to ensure they were applicable to the CPS charter.Following analysis and investigation, the team developed and documented fifteen findings and two observations. Summary of the Findings and Observations Airplane Safety Assurance Processes There are many elements to safety assurance of commercial airplanes. These include the safety assessments performed to support type certification and the continuing adherence to essential operations and maintenance procedures for the life of the airplane. The design team of a new airplane must ensure that all the safety and performance requirements are met. This requires a development assurance process to track the design as it evolves. The airplane safety assessment process can be thought of as a part of this design and development assurance process. As with all design assurance processes, for the safety assessment process to be effective, it must trace through the entire life cycle of the product. Finding 1 Human performance is still the dominant factor in accidents: • The processes used to determine and validate human responses to failure and methods to include human responses in safety assessments need to be improved. • Design techniques, safety assessments, and regulations do not adequately address the subject of human error in design or in operations and maintenance. If significant strides are to be made in lowering the accident rates, a much better understanding of the issues affecting human performance is required. Airplane designers will be challenged to develop systems that are less error-prone. Procedures will also have to be more explicit and more robust with respect to the range of skills and techniques of operations and maintenance personnel. This area would benefit from a better understanding of lessons learned and a sharing of human engineering best practices throughout the industry. Finding 2 There is no reliable process to ensure that assumptions made in the safety assessments are valid with respect to operations and maintenance activities, and that operators are aware of these assumptions when developing their operations and maintenance procedures. In addition, certification standards may not reflect the actual operating environment. It will always be necessary to make assumptions in safety analyses; however, where possible, those assumptions may need to be validated by actual experience. There is currently no organized program to periodically revisit design safety assumptions to ensure that they reflect the full range of environments and operations as the fleet ages. Finding 3 A more robust approach to design and a process that challenges the assumptions made in the safety analysis of flight critical functions is necessary in situations where a few failures (2 or 3) could result in a catastrophic event. This finding highlights the need to examine every safety analysis assumption for its impact on the overall safety of the airplane. Where any assumption has a major effect on the outcome, the analysis and design should address the potential for the assumption being too optimistic. Risk can often be reduced by selection of a relatively conservative design approach with respect to systems with potentially catastrophic failure consequences. Finding 4 Processes for identification of safety critical features of the airplane do not ensure that future alterations, maintenance, repairs, or changes to operational procedures can be made with cognizance of those safety features. Changes developed without Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) involvement or without understanding of the original certification assumptions add risk because the modifier, maintainer, or operator may not be aware of the criticality of the original type design feature being modified. It is difficult for operators to develop such procedures in accordance with those design constraints because only the original equipment manufacturer may have the detailed understanding and documentation of the underlying safety issues. Aviation Safety Data Management The effective management of data is crucial if the federal aviation administration and industry are to fully understand the nature of the safety challenges facing them. Data systems and sources within the federal aviation administration and industry were reviewed and analyzed. How these systems are managed and their success at meeting the needs of their customers are important indicators of their effectiveness. Finally, the data systems must provide the user with the necessary information if they are to be effective at identifying safety issues and accident precursors. Finding 5 Multiple FAA-sponsored data collection and analysis programs exist without adequate inter-departmental coordination or executive oversight. Overlapping objectives, activities, and limited resources indicate federal aviation administration data programs are not adequately coordinated. There is minimal intra-FAA data management program coordination and no clearly defined office responsible for coordinating these activities. Significant effort is underway to improve the quality of aviation safety data identification and collection. Implementing an oversight function in accordance with federal aviation administration Order 1375.1C, Data Management (June 20, 2001) would permit the federal aviation administration to streamline resources and programs and expand program capabilities. Finding 6 Basic data definition and reporting requirements are poorly defined relative to the needs of analysts and other users. Data are being collected in non-standardized formats and stored in multiple, often incomplete, databases. Analysis tools are usually incompatible and narrowly focused on a specific objective or product. As a result, resources are expended on multiple projects and produce separate, yet essentially equivalent products. As a result of multiple dissimilar data collection programs, associated products may not serve the aviation safety needs of government and industry. Finding 7 There is no widely accepted process for analyzing service data or events to identify potential accident precursors. Data management programs must create products and services that effectively identify accident precursors. Data collection, data mining, and analysis with automated tools to alleviate resource constraints and human error must be developed and used. Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces The sharing of information between manufacturers, airlines, and regulatory agencies is an essential element in the certification process and in maintaining the airworthiness of in-service airplanes. Accident and incident investigations continually focus on the breakdown in the communication paths between the members of the aviation industry as being causal or contributory to those events. These breakdowns occur as a result of either inadequate processes or the inherent constraints on communication present in the industry. Additionally, lack of formal communication processes between certain federal aviation administration organizations exist. Finding 8 Adequate processes do not exist within the federal aviation administration or in most segments of the commercial aviation industry to ensure that the lessons learned from specific experience in airplane design, manufacturing, maintenance, and flight operations are captured permanently and made readily available to the aviation industry. The failure to capture and disseminate lessons learned has allowed airplane accidents to occur for causes similar to those of past accidents. The knowledge of experienced individuals must be passed on in one form or another. This transfer of knowledge can be accomplished either formally, in documentation required by policy, or informally. However, no requirement currently exists in the federal aviation administration or in industry to ensure that the important lessons of the past are documented and used when future systems or programs are revised or developed. Without such a process, industry’s memory fades and critical lessons may be painfully relearned. Finding 9 There are constraints present in the aviation industry that have an inhibiting effect on the complete sharing of safety information. The federal aviation administration has made considerable progress in reducing the constraints of legal liability, enforcement action, and public disclosure of safety information. However, the operator or manufacturer may be reluctant to fully disclose all safety information in a timely manner until complete confidentiality is guaranteed. Until this is achieved, the operator or manufacturer may elect not to contribute data out of concern for potential consequences. Finding 10 There are currently no industry processes or guidance materials available which ensure that• Safety related maintenance or operational recommendations developed by the original equipment manufacturer are evaluated by the operator for incorporation into their maintenance or operational programs.• Safety related maintenance or operational procedures developed or modified by the operator are coordinated with the original equipment manufacturer to ensure that they do not compromise the type design safety standard of the airplane and its systems. original equipment manufacturer operational or maintenance recommendations are not always fully considered by operators. Some cases have been identified where this has contributed to accidents or incidents. There have also been cases where operators, without consulting with the OEM, have modified operations or maintenance procedures and practices that have, or potentially could have, impacted the safety of the type design. The challenge will be to identify the additional communication and reviews required to achieve a real safety benefit versus a non-productive communication requirement. Finding 11 The absence of adequate formal business processes between federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service limits effective communication and coordination between the two that often results in inadequate communications with the commercial aviation industry. There are informal processes that have evolved between Flight Standards and Aircraft Certification, but they are neither consistent nor complete. The lack of documented formal business processes between these offices compromises timely communication and coordination that subsequently affects the FAA’s ability to address industry safety issues effectively and industry’s ability to comply fully. Major Repairs and Modifications Once the manufacturer releases an aircraft to an operator, the operator is responsible for maintaining its continued airworthiness. Maintaining continued airworthiness involves routine maintenance, as well as repairs and alterations to the aircraft. For all of these activities, an approved configuration must be maintained. Maintenance, repair, and alteration work is accomplished using either federal aviation administration approved or accepted data, including operator and manufacturer documents. Finding 12 The airline industry and aircraft repair organizations do not have a standardized process for classifying repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft as “Major” as prescribed by applicable Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs). There is no standard process used across the commercial aviation industry or regulatory authority to determine and classify repairs or alterations to commercial aircraft as “Major” as defined by applicable FARs. The result of misclassifying a repair or alteration is the lack of adequate review, validation, and reporting of the sufficiency of repairs or alterations developed. Finding 13 Inconsistencies exist between the safety assessments conducted for the initial Type Certificate (TC) of an airplane and some of those conducted for subsequent alterations to the airplane or systems. Improved federal aviation administration and industry oversight of repair and alteration activity is needed to ensure that safety has not been compromised by subsequent repairs and alterations. Processes for the design and accomplishment of repairs and alterations, including oversight, have not always ensured the continued airworthiness of the airplane. Safety assessments prepared for certification of alterations to the airplane or systems may not meet the same standards as those for the original type certificate, although the FARs require they do so. There have been cases where the modification station or company did not have the appropriate expertise or access to original certification data to conduct adequate safety analyses. Observation 1 original equipment manufacturer and operator’s maintenance manuals, illustrated parts catalogs (IPC), wiring diagrams needed to maintain aircraft in an airworthy configuration after incorporation of service bulletins (SB) and airworthiness directives (AD), are not always revised to reflect each aircraft’s approved configuration at the time the modifications are implemented. Maintenance manuals, IPCs, wiring diagrams, and other federal aviation administration accepted or approved manuals are required for continued airworthiness. Incorrect data as a result of delayed revisions to user manuals can result in the release of an aircraft into service in a non-airworthy configuration. A process is needed to adequately assure that proper repairs and modifications are implemented and mandated configurations are not altered. All manuals and documents that are needed to support the correct implementation of ADs, Alternative Methods of Compliance (AMOCs), Supplemental Type Certificates (STCs) or other authorized documents should be revised to reflect the mandated aircraft design configuration in order to assure continued airworthiness. Safety Oversight Processes federal aviation administration and industry oversight of the design, manufacture, and operation of commercial aircraft involves a large number of tasks. These oversight tasks are often the basis for the discovery of information used to establish safe practices and processes. Oversight also serves as a means to assess the adequacy of existing standards and requirements. Strong and effective industry and federal aviation administration oversight processes can be used to identify potential safety problems and accident precursors. Making improvements in this area can further enhance the present exceptional commercial aviation safety record. Finding 14 Consultant DERs have approved designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations. The designated engineering representative system is generally working well, but still needs emphasis. This system has been enhanced by the addition of new processes for selection and annual review of DERs. However, some consultant designated engineering representative project approvals, which do not require federal aviation administration review, have resulted in designs that were deficient or non-compliant with federal aviation administration regulations because of a lack of designated engineering representative and federal aviation administration technical expertise in certain specialized fields. Finding 15 Processes to detect and correct errors made by individuals in the design, certification, installation, repair, alteration, and operation of transport airplanes are inconsistent, allowing unacceptable errors in critical airworthiness areas. For some certification activities there are well-ordered and effective processes; for others, no formal process exists, or existing processes may be ineffective. When there has been a lack of an effective process, individuals working independently have made errors in critical airworthiness areas; some of these errors have resulted in accidents. Observation 2 Some air carriers do more extensive oversight than others of their in-house and outsourced flight operations and maintenance activities, with major safety and economic benefits. Briefings provided by large Part 121 certificated air carrier personnel indicated that when voluntary internal quality assurance and technical analysis processes are used, significant safety and economic benefits could be realized. The effectiveness of these processes was substantiated in interviews with federal aviation administration principal inspectors with maintenance and operations oversight responsibilities. The federal aviation administration should encourage all segments of the air carrier industry to enhance their existing processes. It has been suggested that federal aviation administration incentives could be considered to influence others in the aviation community to enhance internal and external quality assurance and technical analysis activities. Conclusions Several key conclusions were drawn from the study. First, the findings and observations in this study were found to be interrelated. For example, the team identified four areas of commonality: • Information Flow• Human Factors• Lessons Learned• Accident Precursors Although other common elements could be identified and documented, the key conclusion is that the findings and observations in this study are clearly interrelated and should not be addressed in isolation. Doing so will most likely lead to less than optimal solutions. Second, many of the accidents reviewed during this study followed one or more previous incidents that were not acted upon because those involved in industry and government were unaware of the significance of what they had observed. Often the reason for this lack of awareness was failure to view the significance of the event at the airplane level, rather than at the system or subsystem level. Safety awareness at the airplane level is needed for all key safety specialists, regardless of their organization, and is achieved by both proper training and adequate experience. Safety initiatives could be better coordinated and more effective if the operator, manufacturer, and federal aviation administration could achieve and maintain this level of safety awareness. Finally, traditional relationships among the regulators and industry have inherent constraints that have limited the ability to effectively identify accident precursors. Further safety improvements will require significant intra- and inter-organizational cultural changes to facilitate a more open exchange of information. Process improvements alone will not improve safety unless the leaders of government and industry and their respective organizations are committed to working together to achieve this goal of cultural change. Introduction The remarkable safety of commercial aviation is an outcome of numerous complex, interrelated processes involving government and industry organizations working together toward the common goal of aviation safety. To maintain this high level of safety, continuous effort is required among many organizations and individuals. Even with this high level of safety, accidents still occur. When accidents do occur, it is important to understand their causes and to take steps to minimize or eliminate the risk of accident recurrence. Accident prevention also requires a periodic evaluation of existing processes to identify areas for improvement. Recent accidents, such as the Alaska Airlines MD-83 in January 2000, or the Trans World Airlines Boeing 747 in July 1996, raise questions about the adequacy of airplane certification processes and the consistency by which these processes relate to the operation and maintenance of the airplane. To address these concerns, the federal aviation administration initiated the Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study (CPS) in early 2001 to review the certification processes being applied in the United States. The CPS was a separate but complementary effort to the FAA’s Safer Skies initiative. Safer Skies identified accident intervention strategies (a problem focused activity), while CPS has identified process improvement opportunities (a process focused activity). These processes include: • Understanding and communicating airplane failure modes and design or certification assumptions • Ensuring airplane operations are consistent with the design or certification assumptions and safety analyses• Conducting aircraft maintenance activities• Collecting and analyzing data, including reporting and feedback mechanisms • Understanding the role and effectiveness of federal aviation administration and industry oversight The purpose of the CPS was to find process improvement opportunities and not to reinvestigate aircraft accidents or critique airplane designs. References to incidents, accidents, and designs are used solely to highlight potential process improvements in order to increase aviation safety. This is fundamental to understanding and using this report.The CPS team reviewed the processes associated with US transport airplane certification, from the original type certificate activity through the continued airworthiness processes, and examined how these activities interrelate with in-service maintenance and operations programs, as depicted in Figure 2. The CPS also focused on the information paths between certification, operations, and maintenance processes, as depicted in Figure 3. Findings and observations were continuously reviewed against this diagram to ensure they were applicable to the CPS charter.Development of Study Focus Areas The CPS team accepted the challenge of a one-year study of the airplane certification and in-service life cycle processes. While some reference material involved foreign-manufactured airplanes, the study focused primarily on US certificated transport airplanes. During the initial phase of this study, the team analyzed historical reports, accident case studies, numerous briefings by industry subject matter experts, and reviews of applicable regulatory materials.The CPS team used a top-down and bottom-up analytical approach to better understand the processes related to the certification and life cycle operation of large commercial aircraft. Following a detailed screening activity, five focus areas were identified. These five focus areas formed the basis of the Certification Process Study:• Airplane Safety Assurance Processes• Aviation Safety Data Management• Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces• Major Repairs and Modifications• Safety Oversight Processes Findings and observations were developed and validated from these focus areas. Findings were defined as those results that can be well substantiated and justified with data. Observations are those items that were not as fully substantiated or justified with data due to time and resource constraints. Nevertheless, observations document areas where opportunities exist for process improvements and are not considered less important than findings. The bottom-up review of reference material, the top-down funneling into focus areas, and the development of findings and observations are depicted in Figure 4. Findings and Observations The following section of the report contains the findings and observations of the CPS team. They are arranged by chapters, each chapter covering one of the five study topics. The order and numbering of the chapters and findings do not imply any level of importance or priority. Each chapter also provides a high-level discussion of the processes the CPS team found to be significant to the certification processes in the respective subject area. The reader is cautioned against considering any finding as stand-alone and is encouraged to recognize their interrelationship to other findings and observations in order to gain a better understanding of the certification processes and the areas identified for improvement.Appendix B provides a summary of the findings and observations that resulted from the study. Airplane Safety Assurance Processes Airplane Safety Assurance Processes There are many elements to the safety assurance of commercial airplanes. Included among these are the formal safety assessments performed to support type certification and the continuing adherence to essential operations and maintenance procedures for the life of the airplane. The design team of a new airplane must ensure that all the safety and performance requirements are met. This requires a development assurance process to track the design as it evolves. The airplane safety assessment process can be thought of as a part of this design and development assurance process. As with all design assurance processes, for the safety assessment process to be effective, it must trace through the entire life cycle of the product.During the development of new airplanes, safety assessments are prepared to ensure that the airplane will meet all the safety standards and requirements imposed by the regulatory authorities and by the manufacturer. These assessments include several related analyses, which should be completed in stages as the development progresses, i.e., they are part of the design and development assurance process. The assessments can be divided into two main functional areas; systems and structures, with propulsion included in both areas. Over the past 40 years, technologies have changed and systems have become much more interdependent and integrated. Systems now routinely include circuits with microprocessors, programmable logic devices and, in a few cases, fiber optics. With this increasing complexity, it becomes difficult to determine (particularly for the regulatory authorities) the independence of the systems providing critical functions. Therefore, it is imperative to have a sound safety assessment methodology to ensure that failure conditions have been adequately addressed. The certification regulations and associated guidance material have also been in a continual state of development as more is learned about the causes of accidents, and better processes have been identified for conducting the safety assessments.Although excellent work has been done to improve the quality of the safety assurance processes, there are still some weaknesses that will need attention.Human error is still listed as one of the most frequent contributors in accidents. There is no single area on which to focus to reduce these errors. It will require attention to all the human interfaces involved in design, operation, and maintenance of an airplane. In the systems area, guidance is provided to the manufacturers in the form of advisory circulars, Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) documents, and Society of Automotive Engineers Aerospace Recommended Practices (SAE ARPs). society of automotive engineers ARPs 4761 and 4754 provide excellent guidance to the manufacturers on various topics that need to be addressed in the system safety assessments. However, there are no methods available to evaluate the probability of human error in the operation and maintenance of a particular system design, and existing qualitative methods are not very satisfactory.Validation and communication of the assumptions that are used during the development of the airplane, relative to the eventual maintenance and operation of the airplane in service, are other problem areas. Some of the assumptions that are critical to flight safety are not always well documented.A significant problem appears to be the inadvertent compromise of safety during repair or alteration of the airplane as a result of the lack of awareness of some of the original design constraints. Human performance is still the dominant factor in accidents:Finding 1 • The processes used to determine and validate human responses to failure and methods to include human responses in safety assessments need to be improved.• Design techniques, safety assessments, and regulations do not adequately address the subject of human error in design or in operations and maintenance. Human Factors Issues in Design, Operations, and Maintenance Human errors continue to dominate as a contributing factor in accidents, being listed in approximately 80% of all transport airplane accidents in the past decade. Flight crew errors are listed as the primary cause in 66% of the accidents [1]. Despite the introduction of protective devices or systems, e.g., Ground Proximity Warning System (GPWS), Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS), these percentages have remained relatively unchanged. The industry challenge is to develop airplanes and procedures that are less likely to result in operator error and that are more tolerant of operator errors when they do occur.There are two basic types of human error that can affect the safe operation of an airplane:• Incorrect response after malfunction • Incorrect actions with no malfunction A common assumption in the regulations, advisory circulars, and safety assessments is that single failures, particularly when accompanied with a failure indication, can be detected by the flight crew and, through the use of redundant systems and alternate operating procedures, the flight can be safely continued. In the vast majority of cases, this assumption is correct. However, there are some cases where single failures, which were assumed to cause minor failure effects, have resulted in accidents. Single Failure Assumed To Cause Minor Failure Effects Resulted In Accident A recent example is the Boeing 757-200 operated by Birgenair on February 6, 1996 [2]. The plane crashed at night in visual meteorological conditions (VMC), shortly after takeoff from Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic. Data from the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR) indicated that the captain's air speed indicator displayed an air speed that was incorrect during the takeoff roll and the captain recognized this fact. The incorrect airspeed display was consistent with the effects of a blocked pitot pressure sensor. At an altitude of 7000 feet, the captain's airspeed indicator displayed 350 knots and an overspeed warning occurred. This was followed immediately by activation of the stall warning system stick shaker. Although the failed indicator was recognized during the takeoff roll and two other correctly functioning airspeed displays were available to the flight crew, flight crew confusion about airspeed, the proper thrust setting, and the proper pitch attitude resulted in a stall followed by a descent and crash into the Atlantic Ocean. Shortly after this accident, an Aeroperu Boeing 757 crashed [3] after simultaneous overspeed warnings and stall warnings resulting from a failure to remove tape from the static ports after cleaning the airplane. In each accident, errors by both the ground crew and the flight crew were contributory factors. Failure of Single Attitude Display The failure of a single attitude display is assumed to be either minor or major depending on the phase of flight and if a failure indication is provided. Accidents are not assumed to occur as the result of minor or major failure conditions. Nevertheless, a number of accidents have occurred following the failure of a single attitude display. For example: A Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 crashed 55 seconds after takeoff from Stansted Airport in the UK on December 22, 1999 [4]. The flight crew failed to recognize and correctly respond to faulty roll attitude information displayed on the captain’s Attitude Director Indicator (ADI), despite numerous (at least 14) alerts from the Instrument Comparator Buzzer (ICB) and two calls of “bank” by the flight engineer. The airplane impacted the ground in a 90-degree left bank with a 40-degree nose down pitch attitude and all engines operatingat takeoff power. On the previous flight with a different flight crew, the captain recognized a problem with his ADI and transferred flying duty to the first officer before selecting the alternate Inertial Navigation System (INS), which corrected the roll attitude display problem. Maintenance was informed of the problem with the captain's ADI, but may not have corrected the problem prior to the next flight. Incorrect Response After Malfunction On January 8, 1989, a British Midland Airways Boeing 737-400 suffered a partial fan blade loss in the left engine at flight level (FL) 283 and crashed 19 minutes later, short of a runway at Kegworth, UK [5]. After number one engine failure, a severe vibration was felt accompanied by some engine surges and fumes in the cockpit, but the crew misinterpreted data which was correctly displayed and hastily decided that number two was the faulty engine. After throttling back the number two engine, the vibration seemed to be reduced and then fuel was cut off from the engine. In the non-normal checklist, severe vibration does not necessitate an engine shutdown nor does presence of smoke or fumes in the cockpit. The Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) made four recommendations relative to the engine instrument displays. When a thrust reverser deployed during takeoff on TAM flight 402, a Fokker-100, on October 31, 1996, the thrust reverser interlock cable retarded the throttle lever, as intended [6]. The flight crew assumed that this was caused by an autothrottle system failure. The captain forced the throttle lever forward overcoming the interlock and causing the right engine to go to full thrust with the thrust reverser deployed. The resulting asymmetric force caused a loss of control and the airplane crashed. Other accidents following problems that would not normally be considered catastrophic are referenced here without elaboration: • Failures of a single attitude indicator or spatial disorientation of the pilot: Air India Boeing 747 (1978) [7], Air Transport International DC-8 (1992) [8], and Zantop International Airline L-188 (1984) [9]. • False stall warning during takeoff roll: TWA L-1011 [10]. • Engine failure during takeoff: Midwest Express Airlines DC-9 [11]. The ability of the flight crew to react correctly to system failures seems to have a large variance, which is difficult to evaluate correctly using currently available safety assessment methods. This also makes it difficult to determine the best display techniques to be used to minimize risk. Incorrect Actions With No Malfunction Human error that contributed to accidents of fully functional aircraft or created a fault leading to an accident is a recurring theme and is, in fact, much more common than those following an airplane malfunction. Of particular concern to the airplane designer are the human errors that may be induced by the system design details of a particular model. Some examples include: Air Inter 148, an A320, crashed at Strasbourg in 1992 during an approach to landing [12]. The flight crew inadvertently selected 3300 fpm descent rate rather than 3.3 degree flight path angle because of misuse of a switchable controller which allowed selection of either flight path angle or rate of descent. The Bureau of Enquetes-ccidents noted that the display of selected information was ambiguous on the control panel and inconsistent with the displayed information on the primary flight isplay—a classic human factors issue.A Delta Airlines Boeing 767 incident occurred shortly after takeoff from Los Angeles in 1987 [13]. The flight crew activated fuel cut-off switches rather than the electronic engine controller (EEC) switches which were adjacent to them. Recovery was accomplished after engine relight at 500 ft. This is another example of design (switch layout) contributing to a nearly catastrophic pilot error. A China Airlines A300 crashed during approach to Nagoya, Japan, on April 26, 1994 [14]. Go around mode was inadvertently selected and the First Officer tried to continue the approach by overriding the autopilot. The autopilot in this mode did not disconnect as it would have done on most other airplanes. The stabilizer ran to the extreme nose up position resulting in airplane stall and crash. Another class of human factors accidents is more difficult to categorize because of the broad range of root causes. A few representative examples follow:American Airlines Flight 191, a DC-10, crashed at Chicago in 1979 shortly after takeoff [15]. During takeoff rotation the left engine and pylon assembly and part of the wing leading edge separated and fell to the runway. Collateral damage resulted in loss of the left wing outboard leading edge slats and some warning systems. The cause of the engine separation was traced to an improper procedure used for replacement of the engine which resulted in damage to strut mounts. McDonnell Douglas had specified in its original maintenance procedures and subsequent service bulletins that the engine must be separated from the pylon before the pylon is removed from the wing. However, two major carriers developed procedures to remove the engine and pylon as a single unit using a forklift. This procedure required extreme precision to avoid damage to the spherical support joints, the significance of which was not realized by the maintenance and engineering personnel. Approval was neither sought nor required from the manufacturer or FAA. Eastern Airlines Flight 855, an L-1011, took off from Miami on May 5th, 1983, after maintenance had replaced the oil chip detector plugs on all three engines without installing the “O” rings [16]. The airplane landed safely but with two engines failed and the third engine in imminent anger of failure. Federal Express Flight 14, an MD-11, crashed during a landing at Newark, NJ on July 31, 1997, as a result of overcontrol during flare by the captain, which resulted in a bounce and a hard landing that fractured the right wing of the airplane [17]. A Continental DC-9-32 at Houston, TX landed with the landing gear retracted on February 19, 1996, as a result of the failure of the flight crew to follow the check list and turn on hydraulic power to operate the landing gear [18]. Air Canada Flight 646, a Canadair Regional Jet, at Fredericton, Nova Scotia in 1995 [19] crashed when the flight crew initiated a go-around from a destabilized, idle thrust approach in low visibility. The Transport Safety Board of Canada (TSB) noted that the sequential nature of the steps in the go-around procedure, which placed disproportionate emphasis on the flight director, contributed to inadequate monitoring of the airspeed. The flight director's guidance was not appropriate for the low energy state of the aircraft, nor was the aircraft's response from the low energy condition similar to that experienced by the crew during training. In the case of failed pitot and barometric pressure sensors, particularly if multiple sensors are blocked, a very difficult and confusing condition for the flight crew will exist. There may be multiple warning indications simultaneously indicating underspeed and overspeed conditions in addition to erroneous displays of airspeed, altitude, and vertical speed to both pilots. This condition, which has caused several fatal accidents, is considered to be a catastrophic failure condition. A Northwest Airlines Boeing 727 crashed near Bear Mountain, NY, as a result of ice blockage of all pitot sensors on December 1, 1974 [20]. The airplane encountered icing conditions and the flight crew had not activated pitot heat. Despite rule changes issued because of this accident that require alerting and caution indications for pitot heat failure, on March 2, 1994, a ontinental Airlines MD-82 had an accident because of an unsuccessful high speed rejected takeoff (RTO) (initiated at a speed 5 knots above takeoff decision speed V1) as a result of pitot sensors blocked with ice or snow [21]. The flight crew had interrupted the takeoff checklist and did not turn on the pitot heat system. In each of these accidents, the failure of the sensors was the result of flight crew failure to activate pitot heat.These accidents may point to human factors deficiencies in the design of the flight deck systems or in the various manuals and procedures. The erroneous response by the flight crew following a malfunction is partially addressed by the regulations in 14 code of federal regulations §25.1309 (c), which states: Warning information must be provided to alert the crew to unsafe operating conditions, and to enable them to take appropriate corrective action. Systems, controls, and associated monitoring and warning means must be designed to minimize crew errors which could create additional hazards. There is no such regulatory design requirement to minimize errors by maintenance personnel; however, the federal aviation administration does have a guidance document, Human Factors Guide for Aviation Maintenance [22]. This federal aviation administration document contains human factors information and guidance for personnel at various levels of responsibility in aviation maintenance. One human factors specialist employed by the federal aviation administration Transport Airplane Directorate developed a possible approach to improve this situation with a proposed method of ranking system designs for no credit, partial credit, or full credit in safety assessments based on the ease or difficulty of the flight crew to detect, decide, and take action in response to failures of the system [23]. This methodology, or any other similar approach, would require a significant effort to verify its effectiveness before it could be implemented. A tool, appropriately named Procedural Event Analysis Tool (PEAT), has been found useful during development of the flight deck systems and and procedures. There is very limited guidance, either in the advisory circulars or the society of automotive engineers ARPs used for initial type certification, to ensure that human performance is adequately considered during the development of the airplane design or for development of the training programs. Draft 12 of society of automotive engineers ARP 5150 [24], which has not yet been released, refers to two tools available for improvement of performance of flight and ground crews. These are the Maintenance Error Decision airport information desk (MEDA) and he Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA) tool. However, no mention is made in ARP 5150 of human factors considerations in the design of modified equipment. The federal aviation administration Human Factors Team Report [25] included 51 recommendations, many of which also pertain to the issues discussed above. The report focused on the interfaces between the flight crews and modern flight deck systems. The following interrelated deficiencies were identified in the current aviation system: • Insufficient communication and coordination • Inadequate processes used for addressing human performance issues in design, training, and regulatory functions • Insufficient criteria, methods, and tools for design, training, and evaluation • Insufficient knowledge and skills • Insufficient understanding and consideration of cultural differences in design, training, operations, and evaluation If significant strides are to be made in lowering the accident rates, a much better understanding of the issues affecting human performance is required. The airplane designers will be challenged to develop systems which are less error prone. Procedures will also have to be more explicit and more robust with respect to the range of skills and techniques of operations and maintenance personnel. This area would benefit from a better understanding of lessons learned and a sharing of best practices throughout the industry (see Finding 8). Finding 2 There is no reliable process to ensure that assumptions made in the safety assessments are valid with respect to operations and maintenance activities, and that operators are aware of these assumptions when developing their operations and maintenance procedures. In addition, certification standards may not reflect the actual operating environment. Correlation of Safety Assessment Assumptions with Operations and Maintenance Practices The preparation of a Functional Hazard Assessment and Fault Tree Analysis requires assumptions about the ways in which the airplane will be operated and maintained. The use of such assumptions should be justified by supporting data and should be explicitly stated and effectively disseminated to all operators, maintainers, and modification centers dealing with that aircraft. Assumptions are made relative to:• Aircraft environmental conditions (ice, wind, lightning, electromagnetic interference, temperatures, bird strikes, etc.)• Air traffic environment (domestic and foreign)• Operating conditions and procedures• Maintenance procedures • Training programs During the 1990s several examples of inaccurate certification assumptions emerged. The following case studies will illustrate the finding. Wheel Brake Certification In the 1990 Special Investigation Report Brake Performance of the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 During High Speed, High Energy Rejected Takeoffs [26], the national transportation safety board concluded that: Current Federal regulations do not require setting proper brake wear limits based on the amount of remaining brake friction material necessary to assure continuous brake capability during a maximum energy RTO. They found that brake wear limits were determined by tests conducted using new brakes. This procedure ignored the fact that the overwhelming majority of air carrier operations are conducted with less-than-new brake linings. The applicability of data derived from the performance of new brakes to all operations was shown to be deficient. Further, the national transportation safety board found that, in the case of the DC-10, brake performance data for takeoff considerations were developed by using data from landing tests only. This omitted acceleration effects occurring during reduction from takeoff thrust setting. Although this case has been addressed by changes in the certification criteria, the original criteria which allowed the use of new brakes, and which failed to account for the effects of thrust reduction after brake application during RTO, was not well correlated with actual operating conditions. In-flight Icing Certification Criteria Two accidents in recent years have highlighted inconsistencies between the icing certification criteria and the actual operating environment. The Simmons ATR-72 accident at Roselawn, Indiana, in October 1994 [27] involved an airplane that met the most advanced icing certification standard available at that time, yet the design and the standard did not include consideration of the effects of water droplets larger than those defined in the icing standard contained in 14 code of federal regulations Part 25, Appendix C. The accident analysis determined that the aircraft encountered a supercooled large droplet environment and that the resulting ice shape led to a loss of control. When Appendix C was developed, such environments were suspected but the measurement equipment to distinguish them did not exist. Subsequent research has confirmed that such environments are more common than previously thought. The national transportation safety board stated: Contributing to the accident were: . . . The FAA’s failure to ensure that aircraft icing conditions and federal aviation administration published aircraft icing information adequately accounted for the hazards that can result from flight in freezing rain and other icing conditions not specified in 14 code of federal regulations 25 Appendix C. In the report on Comair EMB-120, an accident that took place at Monroe, Michigan in January 1997 [28], the national transportation safety board stated: The icing certification process has been inadequate because it has not required manufacturers to demonstrate the airplane’s flight handling and stall characteristics under a sufficiently realistic range of adverse ice accretion/flight handling conditions. These two accidents, as well as a number of well-documented incidents, have raised significant questions about the icing engineering standard itself and about the assumptions used when employing the standard in design and certification. While considerable industry effort is being expended to address these questions (for example, the Ice Protection Harmonization Working Group), both accidents highlight different aspects of certification criteria which did not reflect the actual environment. Further, the investigations suggested that the knowledge of icing certification possessed by operators and flight crews did not include an understanding of what had or had not been accomplished in icing certification. Low EnergyGo-Around Certification Following the accident involving Air Canada Flight 646 at Fredericton in 1997 [29], the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) noted some discrepancies between the certification process and the published material available to operators with respect to go-arounds. The aircraft crashed after ttempting a low energy (engines at idle power) go-around from an unstabilized instrument approach. The TSB etermined that when the go-around was initiated, the aircraft was outside of the flight envelope demonstrated during the certification process. Normally, the certification process evaluates the go-around maneuver from a stabilized approach; in this case, the approach was not stabilized. This difference was not apparent to the operator or flight crew. The SB found that: The conditions under which the go-arounds are demonstrated for aircraft certification do not form part of the documentation that leads to aircraft limitations or boundaries for the go-around procedure; this contributed to these factors not being taken into account when the go-around procedures were incorporated in aircraft and training manuals. The TSB recognized that it might be very difficult for the manufacturer to provide information indicating when a safe go-around could not be expected. Nonetheless, they suggested that: Operators and pilots could be provided with the go-around conditions related to certification so an interpretation of what may not be possible could be made. Crosswind Landing Certification Following the accident involving Transavia Flight 462, a Boeing 757, at Amsterdam Schiphol Airport (1997), an extensive inquiry into crosswind certification and operations was made [30]. The aircraft crashed during landing while experiencing a wind reported by the tower to be 240 degrees at 30 knots, maximum 43 knots, resulting in a crosswind component of 35 knots. The flight management system (FMS) wind reading at 600 feet was 240 degrees at 50 knots. The investigation by Dutch authorities questioned why the flight crew had not considered a go-around. They discovered that the maximum demonstrated crosswind of 30 knots was not considered limiting by Transavia standard operating procedures. The report stated that, By not establishing a clear and definite crosswind limit in the Transavia Operations Manual a defense barrier against unsafe operations was lost. An extensive inquiry into crosswind certification and operations was made by the Dutch National Aerospace Laboratory (NLR) [31]. Their report stated that: . . . during this final phase of the approach, the gust of wind coupled with the turbulence induced a significant change in both wind speed and direction resulting in a crosswind in excess of 50 knots. Prior to that the crosswind was 25 to 30 knots. When the NLR examined FAR/JAR 25.23, Wind Velocities, they pointed out that: When JAR/FAR 25.237 is examined carefully, the following can be noticed: • Only dry runways have to be considered. • It is not clear if the wind speed includes gusts or not. • No crosswind limits have to be established, only demonstrated values. They further looked at the guidance for certification to FAR 25.237 provided in AC 25-7. They concluded that: There are two possibilities on how to note crosswinds in the AFM. If the demonstrated crosswind is not considered to be a limiting value for aircraft handling characteristics, this demonstrated value can be placed as information in the AFM. Higher crosswinds are then allowed when the applicable operational requirements and the airline specification allow it. If he demonstrated crosswind is considered to be a maximum limiting value up to which it is safe to operate the aircraft, the demonstrated crosswind value will appear as a limiting value in the AFM. It is not allowed to operate the aircraft beyond this crosswind. For practically all aircraft certified by the federal aviation administration the demonstrated crosswind is not regarded as limiting by the federal aviation administration test pilots. The Dutch authorities noted, in the conclusions section of the Transavia Flight 264 accident report, that: There is a reasonable probability that an actually encountered wind during landing deviates from the reported wind. This uncertainty warrants substantial margins to theoretical wind limitations when operating in crosswind. Much as was the case in the Canadian investigation at Fredericton, it appears that what was actually accomplished in certification was not clear to the operator when company procedures were developed. With respect to crosswind, the NLR also pointed out that this weak understanding of crosswind certification also applies to airport authorities when they are establishing preferred runway criteria. This example leads to the conclusion that the information regarding the boundaries of what was shown during certification may not be adequately communicated to prevent the development and approval of local interpretations, procedures and operating techniques, which imply a basis in certification beyond what was actually accomplished. Maintenance Procedures Assumptions about the effectiveness of maintenance practices to protect the safety of the airplane were identified as a problem after the Alaska Flight 261 accident off Point Mugu, CA in January 2000 [32]. The NTSB, in their preliminary report, stated: . . . engineers from the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group testified that wear of the acme nut is normal and expected and is taken into account by its “robust” design. They further indicated that to maintain the horizontal stabilizertrim system’s structural integrity, acme nut thread wear must be managed through; 1) the regular application of lubrication and, 2) an inspection program to monitor the wear. Boeing engineers acknowledged that, without such maintenance intervention, the type design could be compromised and the results could be catastrophic.It would appear that better identification (see Finding 4) and tighter monitoring might be required of those maintenance practices which could adversely affect the integrity of flight critical functions. Airplane safety was based on the assumption that regular maintenance would preclude excessive wear of this critical part. It will always be necessary to make assumptions in the safety analyses; however, where possible, those assumptions may need to be validated by actual experience and periodically revisited to ensure that they reflect the full range of environments and operators of the fleet. Finding 3 A more robust approach to design and a process that challenges the assumptions made in the safety analysis of flight critical functions is necessary in situations where a few failures (2 or 3) could result in a catastrophic event. Robust Safety Assessments and Design for Critical Functions Safety analyses are accomplished to show that catastrophic events are not expected to occur in the life of an airplane fleet and that lesser events are acceptably unlikely. These analyses are done with the facts and data available at the time, and by making some fundamental assumptions about the behavior of the airplane and its systems, and the people who build, maintain, and operate the airplanes for the life of the fleet. However, a number of events have occurred indicating that the ability to predict correctly all catastrophic failure scenarios is limited. In the early stages of airplane development, designers often have an opportunity to incorporate additional afeguards or use an alternative approach for relatively little added cost in an effort to provide a more robust system.Catastrophic events such as thrust reverser deployment in flight, and fuel tank explosions, have, as one root cause, an incorrect assumption that made the safety analysis invalid. In the case of the thrust reverser deployment, the assumption was that the airplane was controllable in the event of such a deployment. During the development of the Boeing 767, this was demonstrated in flight, but only at low speed with thrust at idle. This was assumed to be the worst condition, erroneously, as found later in the case of Lauda Air in Thailand (1991) [33] In the case of fuel tank explosions, the assumption was that the design, operation, and maintenance practices would prevent ignition sources from being present in the tank throughout the life of the fleet. A second assumption was that the tank could be flammable at any time and thus there was no need to examine the probability of the tank being flammable. The combination of these assumptions created a false confidence in the success of the designs. In reality, some fuel tanks are not flammable for considerable portions of the fleet life, preventing explosions but also masking the failure to prevent ignition sources from being present in the tanks. Certain tanks are flammable for much longer periods, and the failure to keep ignition sources out of the tank may have led to three center tank explosions in the last eleven years. In both of these examples (thrust reversers and fuel tanks), the design was shown to comply with the certification requirements in place at the time of certification, but only because the assumptions were considered to be valid. More in-depth design reviews to question the underlying assumptions may have found these issues. On recent programs, design reviews have included experienced design, operations, and maintenance personnel. These reviews provide an opportunity to challenge the assumptions and determine if a more robust design could be implemented that would provide additional protection. This approach could help to provide protection from failure modes or human actions that were not correctly predicted by analysis. Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) issued NPA 25F-281 in October 1998 [34]. This document contains the proposed advisory material for JAR 25.1309 and points out the following, in paragraph 11(h) on page 25 (Justifications of Assumptions, Data Sources and Analytical Techniques):Any analysis is only as accurate as the assumptions, data, and analytical techniques it uses. Therefore, to show compliance with the requirements, the underlying assumptions, data and analytic techniques should be identified and justified to assure that the conclusions of the analysis were valid. Variability may be inherent in elements such as failure modes, failure effects, failure rates, failure probability distribution functions, failure exposure times, failure detection methods, fault independence, and limitation of analytical methods, processes, and assumptions. The justification of the assumptions made with respect to the above items should be an integral part of the analysis. Assumptions can be validated by using experience with identical or similar systems or components with due allowance made for differences of design, duty cycle or environment. Where it is not possible to fully justify the adequacy of the safety analysis and where data or assumptions are critical to the acceptability of the Failure Condition, extra conservatism should be built into either the analysis or the design. Alternatively any uncertainty in the data and assumptions should be evaluated to the degree necessary to demonstrate that the analysis conclusions are insensitive to that uncertainty. The federal aviation administration is currently drafting an update to AC 25.1309 [35] to support harmonization with the joint aviation authority document.Finding 3 suggests that the failure analysis should be examined in much more depth when the consequences of a failure or combination of one, two, or three failures may be an immediate or unavoidable loss of the airplane. The underlying assumptions of the analysis must be examined to determine if the effect of an incorrect assumption is loss of the airplane. Assumptions on future maintenance, such as separation of critical wiring, have also been incorrect. Both versions of the advisory circulars (ACs) essentially suggest that extra caution be taken in the use of data and assumptions during the design and analysis processes. Every assumption should be examined to understand the sensitivity of the assumption on the results. Where such sensitivity does exist, then the design should be changed to reduce the sensitivity. Similarly, a failure to identify a specific failure mode can occur, particularly when the analysis involves multiple failure paths. One unanticipated failure mode may occur and have a major effect on the airplane safety. In this case it should be addressed by looking at the key protective features and determine if additional safeguards are needed. Reducing fuel flammability is an example of an additional mitigation factor that could reduce the criticality of a failure, which could produce an ignition source in the fuel tanks.One example of a design that added capability well beyond the 14 code of federal regulations §25.1309 requirements is the Boeing 777 flight control system (FCS). The system was designed with several layers of redundancy in the computational paths (both digital and analog), ensuring loss of “get-home” capability would be well beyond extremely improbable. In addition, electrical power for the FCS was protected by use of two dedicated permanent magnet generators on each engine, backed up by the main electrical power buses, the main battery, and a ram air turbine.Many assumptions are historic in nature, justified by “we’ve always done it this way.” These assumptions tend to be so buried in the analysis that the analyst may not recognize them as assumptions. Conversely, an assumption based on historical precedent may be entirely valid but is changed simply because the data supporting it have been lost over time. This assumption can be inappropriate if the original assumption was correct. A related finding (see Finding 8) focuses on the failure of industry to carry forward an understanding of historical bases behind regulations, requirements, and best practices.This finding highlights the need to examine every safety analysis assumption for its impact on the overall safety of the airplane. Where any assumption has a major effect on the outcome, the analysis and design should address the potential for the assumption being wrong. Risk can often be reduced by selection of a relatively conservative design approach with respect to systems with potentially catastrophic failure consequences. Flight Critical Systems and Structures Airplane design decisions are made with consideration of their impact on both systems and structures. Understanding the design assumptions and the interactions of the safety critical features is essential to maintaining the integrity of the airplane for safe operation. These decisions, assumptions, and interactions must be understood individually and collectively before any subsequent change, modification, or repair is made to the airplane or to its components. The design of an airplane requires making numerous choices among different design approaches. These choices, from the highest level, such as the number of engines, down to the smallest component level, such as what kind of fastener to use, are made by specialists in the OEMs. Based on their engineering knowledge, experience, and analyses, these design decisions and features allow the airplane to be used safely for its intended purpose.The final design must meet the requirements of the certification authorities and the design standards of the OEM, but there is no standard means, nor should there be, to design an airplane or its specific components. Different means and various assumptions are made down to the most detailed aspect of the design. These assumptions are typically well documented and maintained in the OEM’s internal documents and are well understood by the responsible designers. In recent years many non-OEM changes, modifications, or repairs were made without original equipment manufacturer involvement or data were not available at the time of the change, modification, or repair. This practice could potentially undermine the integrity of the changed, modified, or repaired airplane or the component to a point that might compromise safety.Two examples where this process failed and allowed new hazards into the original system by the introduction of new wiring are: • Swissair MD-11 entertainment system installation where the power supply used by the supplemental type certificate installation did not conform to the OEM’s design philosophy and resulted in the crew’s inability to turn off the system [36] • Philippine Airlines Boeing 737 fuel tank wiring where the installation of a logo light wire run used the same wire run as for the fuel tank float switch [37] Structural changes or alterations where the modifying company did not know the specific limitations of the original design have also been an issue. These include: • Certain passenger-to-cargo modifications by other than OEMs [38] • The thermal protection of repaired fuel pumps for an operator’s MD-11’s, where the thermal fuses were incorrectly installed and a subsequent pump failure was not protected by the thermal fuses [39] Changes developed without original equipment manufacturer involvement and without an understanding of the original certification assumptions add risk because the modifier, maintainer, or operator is not aware of the criticality of the original type design. It is difficult for operators to develop such procedures in accordance with those design constraints because frequently only a few specialists at the original equipment manufacturer may understand the underlying safety issues.14 code of federal regulations §25.981(b), adopted in 2001, addresses the placard issue for fuel systems as follows:Visible means must be placed in the area of the airplane where maintenance, repairs, or alterations may violate the critical design configuration control limitations.The objective of this requirement is to provide information to maintenance, repair, or modification personnel to minimize errors that could increase the hazards to the airplane. Protection of other flight critical functions in a similar manner would be beneficial. An innovative approach is required to ensure that appropriate procedures, manuals, and placards communicate the relevant safety information so that maintenance, operations, alterations, and repairs can be made with cognizance of the safety features of the original design. This approach would have the following potential benefits:• Provide a method for identification of safety critical features• Ensure that important safety critical design features are not changed without recognition of the effect on safety.• Protect safety critical installations from inadvertent degradation during maintenance, alterations, and repair activities.• Provide a standard for traceability of safety requirements, design constraints, test, and analysis. This finding has a very strong relationship with Findings 10 and 13. Structural Safety Assessment 14 code of federal regulations §25.571 requirements, which were recodified in 1965 from CAR 4b.270, have evolved throughout the past forty years. This regulation, in part, protects the aircraft structures from the adverse effects of operational conditions. Before 1978, CAR 4b.270 and 14 code of federal regulations §25.571 required that airplane structures whose failure could result in catastrophic failure of the airplane be evaluated under the provisions of either fatigue strength or fail-safe strength requirements. If the structure was not demonstrated to withstand the repeated loads of variable magnitude expected in service, it had to be fail-safe. A fail-safe structure is one in which catastrophic failure or excessive structural deformation that could adversely affect the flight characteristics of the airplane are not probable after fatigue failure or obvious partial failure of a single primary structural element (PSE). After these types of failures of a single PSE, the remaining structure must be able to withstand static loads corresponding to the required residual strength loads. If the concept of fail-safe was impractical, structures were certified using the safe-life concept. Most common examples of structures that have been certified to safe-life were landing gear components and structure associated with control surfaces.The Dan-Air Flight 039 Boeing 707 accident on May 14, 1977 [40], proved that these concepts were inadequate, and on October 5, 1978, Amendment 25-45 of the rule was issued. In this accident, evidence of simultaneous crack nucleation and propagation from colinear holes, which operated at or near the same stress level, linked up and caused the starboard horizontal stabilizer to break off the airplane. Amendment 25-45 added the concept called damage tolerance to the rule. Damage tolerance is the attribute of the structure that permits it to retain its required residual strength for a period of use after the structure has sustained a given level of fatigue, corrosion, or discrete source damage. Amendment 25-45 requires that a damage tolerance assessment of the structure be accomplished to determine the most probable location of the damage and to provide an inspection program that requires directed inspections of critical structure. The damage tolerance assessment philosophy essentially replaced the fail-safe and safe-life design philosophies.In April 1988, a high-cycle Aloha Airlines Boeing 737 experienced an in-flight explosive decompression of the fuselage caused by the undetected presence of widespread fatigue damage (WFD) [41]. This accident increased the concern about the airworthiness of high numbers of aging aircraft, which were otherwise not being inspected for this type of damage. As a result of this accident, several aging aircraft initiatives were launched by the federal aviation administration and industry: • Publication of select service bulletins describing necessary modifications and inspections • Development of inspection and prevention programs to address corrosion • Development of generic structural maintenance program guidelines for aging airplanes • Review and update of supplemental structural inspection documents (SSIDS) that describe programs to detect fatigue cracking• Assessment of damage tolerance of structural repairs • Development of program to preclude WFD in the fleet For large transport airplanes, most of the first five initiatives have been accomplished. The federal aviation administration is working on rulemaking currently to mandate the last initiative [42]. Amendment 25-72 removed the words ‘fail-safe’ from the rule. Additionally, the Airworthiness Assurance Working Group (AAWG) recommended that industry initiate programs to eliminate WFD from all affected airplane models. Amendment 25-96, later mandated, among other things, that manufacturers consider WFD in areas that are prone to this type of damage. This amendment also requires the manufacturer to conduct a full-scale fatigue test of each new airplane to demonstrate that WFD will not occur within the Design Service Goal of the airplane.