Commercial Airplane Certification Process Study An Evaluation of Selected Aircraft Certification, Operations, and Maintenance Processes. The Report of the federal aviation administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification’s Study on the Commercial Airplane Certification Process. March 2002 US Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration March 14, 2002 Federal Aviation Administration Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification 800 Independence Avenue, S.W.Washington, DC Maintenance, Operations, and Certification Interfaces The sharing of information between manufacturers, airlines, and regulatory agencies is an essential element in the certification process and in maintaining the airworthiness of in-service airplanes. Of the many communication interface issues reviewed, four were identified that were of special concern:• Capturing the lessons learned from design, manufacturing, maintenance and operating experience• Constraints on the sharing of safety information• Maintenance and operational safety recommendations and feedback between operators and OEMs • Communication and coordination between aircraft certification and flight standards services Preparation of these findings was based on reviews of relevant requirements and advisory material, case studies, historical reports, presentations by and discussions with operators, OEMs, Principal Maintenance and Operations Inspectors, federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification, Flight Standards, Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG) personnel, and CPS team members. Finding 8 Adequate processes do not exist within the federal aviation administration or in most segments of the commercial aviation industry to ensure that the lessons learned from specific experiences in airplane design, manufacturing, maintenance, and flight operations are captured permanently and made readily available to the aviation industry. The failure to capture and disseminate lessons learned has allowed airplane accidents to occur for causes similar to those of past accidents. Capturing the Lessons Learned from Design, Manufacturing, Maintenance, and Operating ExperiencUnderstanding the mistakes of the past and the lessons learned from them is an important step in assuring that those mistakes are not repeated. The investigation of accidents and incidents is one of the most effective ways to identify these mistakes and the lessons derived from them. While the experiences of the past are a valuable source of improved knowledge in all aspects of commercial aviation, maximum benefit has not always been derived from these experiences. Too often, lessons are not learned or adequately captured. This increases the risk that such knowledge will be lost with time. Regardless of the reasons, failure to capture adequately the important lessons of the past sets the stage for the repetition of past errors. Historically, federal aviation administration regulations, guidance, and commonly accepted good aviation practices are based in large part on the lessons learned from past experience and, in particular, from past accidents. There is no requirement for a permanent and commonly available repository of experiences from which federal aviation administration regulatory and guidance material and industry best practices are derived. Additionally, there is no requirement to familiarize personnel in positions with safety responsibilities in the relevant experiences and mistakes of the past. Exacerbating this problem is the natural, and sometimes rapid, turnover of personnel in all segments of the commercial aviation industry. Capturing the knowledge these individuals have gained during their careers is as important as capturing the lessons of past accidents. Without processes in place to capture and communicate this information, institutional and individual memories fade and important lessons may be lost. Historical perspective is an essential element in educating regulators and certificate holders to justify the need for regulatory change. A major source of the historical rationale for a regulation is contained in 14 code of federal regulations preambles. This material is often incomplete and difficult to research. Past preambles are often less comprehensive than those published today and may contain only the disposition of public comments to an federal aviation administration proposal. A review of existing 14 code of federal regulations preamble materials indicates that there are no consistently applied processes under which regulatory preamble material is developed. The Final Report of radio technical commission for aeronautics Task Force 4 Certification [1] also addressed this issue. Finding 11 of the radio technical commission for aeronautics report states in part: The authorities should correct the improper application of rules, guidance, and policy by educating agency specialists about the conceptual basis for regulatory material. There are many examples in the history of commercial aviation to illustrate the importance of capturing and remembering lessons learned, as the following three case studies will illustrate. Fuel Line Certification Criteria On November 11, 1965, a Boeing 727 crashed on approach to the airport at Salt Lake City, Utah [2]. During the accident, the right main landing gear severed fuel lines resulting in a cabin fire. Following the investigation, the Civil Aeronautics Board recommended specific design changes to the FAA. As a result, 14 code of federal regulations §25.993(f) was revised to state that, “Each fuel line within the fuselage must be designed and installed to allow a reasonable degree of deformation and stretching without leakage.” However, detailed discussion of the rationale of what constituted a suitable design was contained only in internal federal aviation administration communications and the revised airplane design requirements of the affected OEM. As a result, recent interpretations of this regulation appear to conflict with the original intent of this revision. This has led to airplane designs that appear to meet the requirement but not the intent of the 1965 revision to this regulation. These airplane designs address the flight loads, ground loads, and pressurization cycle issues specified in the regulation but not the more stringent requirements of partial fuselage break up that were derived from the Salt Lake City accident. Follow-on airplanes of the original manufacturer, who had more detailed information about the rationale behind the rule, have installations that meet the intent of the rule. However, changes in 14 code of federal regulations Part 25 regulatory material and industry guidance material to adequately reflect the original intent have never been made In-flight Fire On November 3, 1973, a Boeing 707 cargo airplane crashed short of the runway at Boston-Logan airport with a seriously deteriorating smoke and fire condition that the flight crew was unable to control [3]. On June 2, 1983, a DC-9 landed in Cincinnati after an uncontrollable fire was discovered on board [4]. The national transportation safety board reports on both of these accidents indicated that the flight crews underestimated the severity of their emergencies and did not land the airplanes as soon as possible. On September 2, 1998, an MD-11 crashed near Halifax, Nova Scotia following an uncontrollable fire inboard. Although a final report has not been issued, the investigation is evaluating the timeliness of the diversion and landing decision [5]. It appears that the operational lessons of both the Boeing 707 and the DC-9 accidents may not have been adequately learned by industry. Automated Propeller Response in the Event of Powerplant Failure In the 1980s, the development of several new turboprop commuter airplanes resulted in proposals for certification that would allow multiple engine autofeather following engine failure. Accidents involving multiple engine autofeather events had occurred in the 1950s and 1960s and guidance material to understand and eliminate this as an accident cause had been incorporated into the Civil Aeronautics Manual. This requirement was not captured in the Civil Air Regulations (CAR) nor was it carried forward to the Federal Aviation Regulations in the mid-1960s. It was the past experience of an federal aviation administration specialist who understood the relevance of those earlier events and was able to provide the guidance to the various manufacturers regarding these earlier lessons. The current 14 code of federal regulations Part 25 does not address this issue, so tomorrow’s designers may not understand the lessons that should have been learned from previous autofeather related accidents. Regulations and related guidance materials are often revised as a result of accident and incident investigations. The processes intended to improve these materials cannot be effective without ensuring a permanent and ongoing understanding of the rationale for the change, as well as a method for retention of the costly lessons that may not have been incorporated into the standards. Without this additional insight, safety improvement efforts may not be fully understood by future designers. The knowledge of experienced individuals may well be passed in one form or another. This can be accomplished either formally in documentation required by policy or informally by word of mouth. However, no requirement currently exists in the federal aviation administration or in the commercial aviation industry to ensure that the important lessons of the past are memorialized and shared. Without such a process, industry’s memory fades and critical lessons may be painfully re-learned. Finding 9 There are constraints present in the aviation industry that have an inhibiting effect on the complete sharing of safety information. Constraints on the Sharing of Safety Information The primary goal of the airline industry is to provide safe transportation to the traveling public. To achieve this goal, considerable human and economic resources are dedicated to analyzing collected safety data in an effort to identify accident precursors or potentially unsafe trends. Properly collected and analyzed operational and maintenance information can be a powerful accident prevention tool. However, some of this information may be proprietary and can provide a significant economic benefit in a competitive environment. If used improperly, this information may cause extensive economic and public relations harm. Although this harm is often thought to relate to legal liability only, enforcement action and public disclosure of safety information are equally significant factors. For a safety data collection program to be timely and effective, protection of the data from all these issues is required. Safety information is collected by government agencies, manufacturers, and operators. Most safety information gathered by the government is available to the public through the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). However, litigation is often required to release safety information gathered by manufacturers or operators. Concerns for legal liability, enforcement action, and public disclosure of safety information hamper the collection and analysis of safety data and impede its free exchange, thereby impacting aviation safety. The legal liability issue is of primary concern since court judgments can result in significant monetary and punitive awards. Frequently, a major segment of litigation is based on tracing exchanged safety information to its source. There are several federal aviation administration safety reporting programs where operators are required to contribute data. Most of these data are de-identified to protect confidentiality. While this technique has frequently addressed the legal liability and disclosure issues, it has diminished the value of the exchanged safety information. Legal Liability The legal liability issue is of primary concern since court judgments can result in significant monetary and punitive awards. Frequently, a major segment of litigation is based on tracing exchanged safety information to its source. There are several federal aviation administration safety reporting programs where operators are required to contribute data. Most of these data are de-identified to protect confidentiality. While this technique has frequently addressed the legal liability and disclosure issues, it has diminished the value of the exchanged safety information. Protecting safety information collected by operators and manufacturers from litigating parties is difficult. One approach observed was to collect, analyze, and retain the information for a specific time. This, however, limits the amount of data collected and its usefulness for analyses. Some operators simply elect not to collect safety data to discourage litigation. Manufacturers have developed elaborate informal processes to gather safety information for internal use. Formal requirements also exist for the exchange of safety information with the FAA. Regardless of which processes the operators and manufacturers use, the threat of litigation to seek safety information exists.Several courts have ruled inconsistently on the confidentiality of safety information used in litigation. Until such time as complete confidentiality of all formally or informally collected safety information is guaranteed, some operators or manufacturers may be reluctant to share safety information. Public Disclosure of Safety Informationn There is a reluctance to report or share safety data if it is not protected from public disclosure since it can be misinterpreted or misquoted if reported in the media. The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security [6] also recognized the protection issue by stating:. . . people and companies will not provide or assemble safety data . . . if it can in any way cause them a liability. For example, a major US airline willingly cooperated in an federal aviation administration sponsored Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA) reporting program and provided large amounts of data. Less data were provided by other airlines in the same program. Subsequently, the data were publicly disclosed and quoted in the media. The inference was that the airline providing large amounts of data was less safe than the others. This airline subsequently withdrew from the flight operations quality assurance program. In the Federal Aviation Reauthorization Act of 1996 (Section 40123), Congress recognized the importance of gathering and analyzing safety data to, “. . . spot trends before they result in accidents” and directed the federal aviation administration to, “. . . issue regulations to carry out this section.” This would prevent the public disclosure of voluntarily provided safety or security information under most conditions. In June 2001, the federal aviation administration issued 14 code of federal regulations Part 193, Protection of Voluntary Submitted Information [7]. The federal aviation administration issued the flight operations quality assurance rule on November 30, 2001 [8]. The two rules complement each other. The former provided for the protection of voluntarily submitted information except under limited circumstances while the latter established a voluntary safety data collection program using flight data recorder information. These rules are a major step forward in addressing the legal concerns of operators, but they only apply to voluntarily supplied data and only to data provided to the FAA. Occasionally, there is a need to exchange safety information with other operators or manufacturers. However, 14 code of federal regulations Part 193 does not protect this information. All safety data must be completely protected to ensure the effective and timely identification of safety issues. Enforcement Action The fear of enforcement action against a manufacturer, operator, or individual for disclosing safety violations also exists. The federal aviation administration has made efforts to diminish this form of action against an individual by establishing the Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP) [9] and the Aviation Safety Reporting Program (ASRP) [10]. The Voluntary Disclosure Reporting Program [11] was established to provide the operator a process to disclose apparent violations. One of the prime reasons for establishing these programs was to encourage voluntary reporting of safety issues and events. All of these programs have specific requirements for compliance designed to eliminate the threat of enforcement action. There are a number of international actions that attempt to address these issues:• international air transportation association recently set up the Safety Trend Evaluation, Analysis and Data Exchange System (STEADES). This initiative appears to have the potential to become a useful process for the free exchange of safety data.• international civil aviation organization currently recommends the collection of flight operations quality assurance data and will require this under Annex 6 in January 2005. This recommends that the program be non-punitive and that adequate safeguards be in place to protect the suppliers of data.• There are many years of experience in Europe with the use of non-punitive exchange of data. In spite of the different legal systems, this experience may help to resolve some of the US problems.• The UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) issued, in March 2000, Airworthiness Notice Number 71, Maintenance Error Management Systems (MEMS), covering the voluntary submittal of safety critical maintenance error data.The federal aviation administration has made considerable progress in reducing the constraints of legal liability, enforcement action, and public disclosure of safety information. However, the operator or manufacturer may be reluctant to fully disclose all safety information in a timely manner until complete confidentially is guaranteed. Until this is achieved, the operator or manufacturer may elect not to contribute data out of concern for these potential consequences. Finding 10 There are currently no industry processes or guidance materials available which ensure that:•Safety related maintenance or operational recommendations developed by the original equipment manufacturer are evaluated by the operator for incorporation into their maintenance or operational programs; and •Safety related maintenance or operational procedures developed or modified by the operator are coordinated with the original equipment manufacturer to ensure that they do not compromise the type design safety standard of the airplane and its systems. Maintenance and Operational Safety Recommendations and Feedback Between Operators and Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) When an operator first introduces an airplane model into service, there is a tremendous amount of coordination that takes place to ensure that the operator is aware of and considers the OEM’s recommendations on how the airplane should be operated and maintained. This communication and coordination is in many ways enhanced by the processes administered by the federal aviation administration (e.g., the Maintenance Review Board (MRB) and the Flight Operations Evaluation Board (FOEB)). After the initial approvals are granted, there are no known formal industry processes or requirements to ensure that operators review the OEM’s safety related recommendations. There is also no requirement for operators to include these recommendations in appropriate procedures and manuals. Similarly, there is no requirement or process to ensure that operator changes to operations or maintenance programs are coordinated with the original equipment manufacturer to prevent adverse impact on the safety of the type design produced by the original equipment manufacturer and approved by the FAA. Both OEMs and operators want the flow of safety related communications to be robust and efficient. However, a review of accident case studies and interview sources indicates that this is not always the case. There is a large amount of information flowing from OEMs to operators that could be considered safety-related. However, the only mechanism available that ensures that the OEM’s or the FAA’s recommendations are implemented by an operator is the Airworthiness Directive (AD) process described in 14 code of federal regulations Part 39. Airworthiness Directives are an appropriate correction process when:• An unsafe condition exists in a product; and • That condition is likely to exist or develop in other products of the same type design. Although some of these recommendations involve safety deficiencies that are addressed with the AD process, other recommendations may or may not be reviewed and considered for incorporation in the operator’s manuals. Examples of these recommendations include Operations Manual Bulletins, Maintenance Manual procedural changes, and Warnings/ Cautions included in both the maintenance and operations manuals. For example, following a September 2, 1998 accident of an MD-11 aircraft accident en route from New York to Geneva, Switzerland, the original equipment manufacturer issued an Operations Manual Bulletin [12] to all MD-11 operators clarifying the crew’s role in reacting to on-board smoke and fire events. The Operations Manual Bulletin discussed a safety issue that could not be addressed by an AD since an unsafe condition had not been identified. Equally important, there is no requirement that ensures that operators who make changes to their operations or maintenance programs coordinate them with the OEM. This is not a new issue. The National Research Council’s report on Improving Aircraft Safety [13] recommended that the manufacturer should have:. . . continuing knowledge of an operator’s maintenance procedures by obtaining the manufacturer’s formal review prior to authorizing any significant deviation from the approved maintenance program.Several accident examples can be cited which address the safety communication breakdown that sometimes occurs between operator and OEM: • On May 25, 1979, a DC-10 aircraft departing from Chicago-O’Hare International Airport, Illinois, crashed shortly after takeoff following the separation of the left engine and pylon assembly. Although there were numerous findings identified by the national transportation safety board [14] involving the manufacturer, the airlines, and the FAA, a number of them concerned a procedure developed by two airlines that involved removing and reinstalling DC-10 wing-mounted engines as a single unit. The original equipment manufacturer had recommended in their original maintenance procedures and in follow-on service bulletins that the engine be separated from the pylon before removing the pylon from the wing. Apparently, the airlines were not aware of the safety concern that the original equipment manufacturer had for engine-pylon removal. Neither of the airlines requested that the original equipment manufacturer review their revised procedures.• On January 9,1997, an Embraer EMB-120 aircraft approaching Detroit crashed near Monroe, Michigan. The national transportation safety board determined the probable cause to be a premature stall because of ice accretion [15], and noted in the report’s findings that:Had the pilots … been aware of the specific airspeed, configuration and icing circumstances of the six previous EMB-120 icing-related events and of the information contained in Operational Bulletin 120-002/96 and revision 43 to the EMB-120 airplane flight manual, it is possible that they would have operated the airplane more conservatively with regard to airspeed and flap configuration or activated the deicing boots when they knew they were in icing conditions. Finding 30 of the national transportation safety board report noted: The current Federal Aviation Administration policy allowing air carriers to elect not to adopt airplane flight manual operational procedures without clear written justification can result in air carriers using procedures that may not reflect the safest operating practices.In this case, the flightcrew of the accident aircraft did not have the latest operational guidance that had been provided by the OEM.• On September 2, 1998, an MD-11 aircraft en route from New York to Geneva, Switzerland, crashed in the Atlantic Ocean near Peggy’s Cove, Nova Scotia, Canada, following an in-flight fire. Although the TSB report has not been released, the results of an federal aviation administration Special Certification Review Team report [16] were released in June 1999. Finding 1 of that report stated that . . . the current design of the IFEN [In-flight Entertainment] system electrical power switching is not compatible with the design concept of the MD-11 airplane with regard to the response by the flightcrew to a cabin or flight deck smoke/fumes emergency.In particular, the OEM’s design concept removed power from all main cabin systems when the CAB BUS switch is engaged during a smoke/fumes emergency. This design, implemented by a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC), violated that concept by connecting the in-flight entertainment system to a power source that was not de-energized when the CAB BUS switch was activated. Although it cannot be stated at this time the exact role this may have played in the accident, there is no indication in the report that the operator (responsible for the operating procedures) or the supplemental type certificate applicant coordinated or consulted with the original equipment manufacturer on this proposed installation. This may have resulted in the emergency fire and smoke checklist procedures provided by the original equipment manufacturer and those in use by the operator to be inconsistent with the configuration of the aircraft at the time of the accident. • On January 31, 2000, an MD-83 aircraft traveling from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, to Seattle, Washington, crashed into the Pacific Ocean near Point Mugu, California, following a catastrophic horizontal stabilizer jackscrew assembly failure. Although the national transportation safety board investigation is not complete and a report has not been published, a set of recommendations released on October 1, 2001, by the Safety Board [17] provides some insights pertinent to this CPS finding. One example concerns the “. . . potential adverse effects caused by mixtures of inappropriate grease types or incompatible mixtures of grease types.” In an attempt to standardize the grease used across its entire fleet, the operator elected to change from Mobilgrease 28, which used a clay-based thickening agent, to Aeroshell Grease 33, which used a lithium-based agent. The national transportation safety board found that the original equipment manufacturer had previously expressed concern about mixing grease types and had provided the operator with a “no technical objection” to the grease change as long as the operator monitored the areas where Aeroshell 33 grease was to be used and obtained federal aviation administration approval as required by their Principal Maintenance Inspector. While the relevance of Aeroshell 33 grease or the mixing of grease types in this accident has not been determined by the NTSB, it appears that a safety related recommendation developed by the original equipment manufacturer was either not clearly communicated as a safety recommendation by the original equipment manufacturer or not adequately evaluated by the operator for incorporation into their maintenance program.Addressing this finding will not be straightforward. Requiring operators to get original equipment manufacturer approval for every change made to their operations or maintenance programs is not realistic. The OEMs are not staffed to review all potential changes to their customers’ programs. Likewise, requiring operators to review every recommendation or suggestion made by OEMs for possible inclusion in their programs may also not be realistic. An additional disincentive to the operators from coordinating changes with the original equipment manufacturer is the cost and possible program delays. A particular challenge exists in defining “safety related” recommendations or changes in a manner that is clearly understood by the operator and OEM. This is not an easy issue to resolve and was discussed in the National Research Council report on May 25, 1979, Improving Aircraft Safety [13] in 1980. The committee recognizes that this recommendation introduces the need to define “significant” in a way that will make it clear which items require a review by the manufacturer-designer. Such items should be confined strictly to those involving the continuing integrity and safety of the design.The existing ATA-100 Alert Service Bulletin concept and the federal aviation administration Airworthiness Directive process do not address all safety related recommendations – nor should they. These processes are for communicating information on and correcting unsafe conditions. The process of identifying the remaining safety related recommendations and changes and communicating these in an adequate manner between original equipment manufacturer and operator needs improvement. Striking a balance between onerous intrusion and the addressing of true safety issues will be a difficult task. Unique airline operating conditions and alternative operating methods complicate this matter even further. This issue of identifying and communicating safety related information is also addressed by Findings 4 and 13. In conclusion, the potential exists for original equipment manufacturer operational or maintenance recommendations not to be fully considered by operators. The potential also exists for operators to modify operations or maintenance procedures and practices that could impact the safety of the type design. The challenge will be to identify the additional communication and reviews required to achieve a real safety benefit versus an onerous communication requirement. The solution to this problem does not appear to be achievable simply with additional regulation or requirements. Indeed, it appears that this communication problem may best be solved by an industry partnership – both manufacturers and operators – with the federal aviation administration monitoring the progress and effectiveness of the solutions identified. Finding 11 The absence of adequate formal business processes between federal aviation administration Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service limits effective communication and coordination between the two that often results in inadequate communications with the commercial aviation industry Communication and Coordination Between Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service The national transportation safety board has often cited lack of adequate federal aviation administration oversight as a contributing factor when accidents occur or when other significant safety problems are identified. Interviews with federal aviation administration personnel and a review of case histories revealed that this lack of oversight was due in part to the absence of formal processes that would ensure the communication of safety information between the Aircraft Certification Service and Flight Standards Service. This results in existing federal aviation administration work programs not being adequately coordinated on matters concerning oversight findings, safety issues, and allocation of oversight resources. The lack of formal processes also impedes the coordination and dissemination of safety related information and control of guidance material intended for use by both the federal aviation administration and industry, allowing potentially unsafe aircraft configurations or operations.Examples of these breakdowns in communication and coordination between the two services are illustrated by the following case studies. Icing Related In-service Events Interviews with federal aviation administration and former federal aviation administration personnel [18] involved with analyzing icing events stated that Flight Standards had information concerning potentially hazardous flight characteristics of airplanes under heavy ice buildups that was not promptly communicated to Aircraft Certification Service. As a result, actions by Aircraft Certification to correct airplanes and their systems were delayed. Alteration of Maintenance Programs: The federal aviation administration review of the Alaska Airlines maintenance program for the MD-83 indicates that the operator substantiated the escalation of their C-check program through their maintenance reliability program [19]. Within the operator’s escalated C-check program, there were critical systems inspections. The PMI was aware of his operator's program escalation. However, there was no documented process that would have recommended coordination with the increased inspection intervals of critical systems with the aircraft evaluation group or ACO responsible for the MD-80 type design. A process designed to ensure a formal exchange of safety related data between Aircraft Certification and Flight Standards and its subsequent coordinated distribution to commercial airplane operators would provide a more effective and proactive use of safety data and oversight resources. Formally defined coordination between these two offices would facilitate the development of potential accident precursor information. Aircraft Certification and Flight Standards Services personnel perform safety oversight functions usingseparate uncoordinated methodologies to determine resource needs, deployment, and inspection requirements. For example, the National Program Guidelines (NPG) was established in Flight Standards as a method of accomplishing oversight. In 1996, Flight Standards Service developed the Air Transportation Oversight System (ATOS). ATOS links the oversight functions and the ability to target resources to the areas needed. Existing automated programs, such as the Aircraft Certification System Evaluation Program (ACSEP) and the Flight Standards Safety Performance Analysis System (SPAS) are in place to support aviation safety oversight functions and data gathering, but they are not always adequate to coordinate resources and exchange pertinent safety information between Flight Standards and Aircraft Certification. As a consequence, day-to-day surveillance data or safety information of interest to specialties within Aircraft Certification and Flight Standards may not be passed along or coordinated. Further, available resources may not always be assigned or used to support the planned overall safety oversight objective.In the field, links between the two organizations are very limited and have not been thoroughly developed to assure optimum communication between them. The aircraft evaluation group was created to resolve this communication deficiency and serves as the liaison organization between Aircraft Certification and Flight Standards. However, there remains a lack of adequate formal guidelines that define the interface between Aircraft Certification and Flight Standards. Without such protocols, there is an ongoing risk that important safety data and precursor information may not be communicated in a way that assures proper analyses and appropriate action. While efforts have been initiated to address this issue, it remains unresolved.At the federal aviation administration Headquarters level, both Services are authorized to publish regulations, advisory circulars (ACs), internal federal aviation administration orders, notices, and policy memos. However, no formal business process requires Aircraft Certification and Flight Standards to communicate and coordinate the issuance of these documents. Given the lack of these formal processes, there exist many informal, uncoordinated practices, based primarily on established personal relationships, used by the two services to communicate. These practices frequently are inadequate and inconsistent and have resulted in multiple documents being produced by both services that either contradict or duplicate each other. This situation increases the challenges faced by Aviation Safety Inspectors and Aviation Safety Engineers in their oversight roles. The effect on the industry is a variety of individual operator interpretations and uncertainty as to adequate compliance. Worse, it compromises the industry’s perception of federal aviation administration coordination and technical competence.No process exists for archiving past policy and guidance material in order to determine what the FAA’s position has been in the past. Such a database of past policy and guidance would benefit both the federal aviation administration and industry. It would promote greater consistency on the part of the federal aviation administration when issuing policy and guidance material and greater understanding and improved consistency of industry compliance. Without an effective archival process, the likelihood for duplicating or contradicting past notices, policy letters, and memos exists. Currently, notices, draft notices and handbook bulletins are posted on the federal aviation administration website; however, this is not a complete archival system. For example, document termination dates are poorly controlled and may not be adhered to at all. This promotes internal confusion and a proliferation of advisory materials in various forms.It is common practice by some federal aviation administration inspectors and certification personnel to interpret and enforce guidance material as regulatory. This has only added to the confusion and in some instances creates a less than positive working relationship with industry. There are many examples of these occurrences as evidenced by the number of formal complaints from industry and congressional representatives. A recent example is the attempts of Flight Standards maintenance safety inspectors to enforce the 14 code of federal regulations Part 145 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) [20], which proposed updates and changes to domestic repair stations, before the proposed rule was final and in effect. There are informal processes that have evolved between Flight Standards and Aircraft Certification but they are neither consistent nor complete. The lack of documented formal business processes between these offices compromises effective communication and coordination that may affect the FAA’s ability to address industry safety issues effectively and industry’s ability to fully comply with federal aviation administration regulations and requirements.