5.1 INTRODUCTION The preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) technique is a safety analysis tool for identifying hazards, their associated causal factors, effects, level of risk, and mitigating design measures when detailed design information is not available. The preliminary hazard analysis provides a methodology for identifying and collating hazards in the system and establishing the initial system safety requirements (SSRs) for design from preliminary and limited design information. The intent of the preliminary hazard analysis is to affect the design for safety as early as possible in the development program. The preliminary hazard analysis normally does not continue beyond the subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA). 5.2 BACKGROUND This analysis technique falls under the preliminary design hazard analysis type (PD-HAT) because it evaluates design at the preliminary level without detailed information. The analysis types are described in Chapter 3. Gross hazard analysis and potential hazard analysis are alternate names for this analysis technique. The purpose of the preliminary hazard analysis is to analyze identified hazards, usually provided by the preliminary hazard list (PHL), and to identify previously unrecognized hazards early in the system development. The preliminary hazard analysis is performed at the preliminary design level, as its name implies. In addition, the preliminary hazard analysis identifies hazard causal factors, consequences, and relative risk associated with the initial design concept. The preliminary hazard analysis provides a mechanism for identifying initial design SSRs that assist in designing in safety early in the design process. The preliminary hazard analysis also identifies safety critical functions (SCFs) and op-level mishaps (TLMs) that provide a safety focus during the design process. The preliminary hazard analysis is applicable to the analysis of all types of systems, facilities, operations, and functions; the preliminary hazard analysis can be performed on a unit, subsystem, ystem, or an integrated set of systems. The preliminary hazard analysis is generally based on preliminary or baseline design concepts and is usually generated early in the system development process in order to influence design and mishap risk decisions as the design is developed into detail. The preliminary hazard analysis technique, when methodically applied to a given system by experienced safety personnel, is thorough in identifying system hazards based on the limited design data available. A basic understanding of hazard analysis theory is essential as well as knowledge of system safety concepts. Experience with, or a good working knowledge of, the particular type of system and subsystem is necessary in order to identify and analyze all hazards. The preliminary hazard analysis methodology is uncomplicated and easily learned. Standard preliminary hazard analysis forms and instructions are provided in this chapter, and standard hazard checklists are readily available. The preliminary hazard analysis is probably the most commonly performed hazard analysis technique. In most cases, the preliminary hazard analysis identifies the majority of the system hazards. The remaining hazards are usually uncovered when subsequent hazard analyses are generated and more design details are available. Subsequent hazard analyses refine the hazard cause–effect relationship and uncover previously unidentified hazards and refine the design safety requirements. There are no alternatives to a PHA. A preliminary hazard list might be done in place of the PHA, but this is not recommended since the preliminary hazard list is only a list of hazards and not as detailed as a preliminary hazard analysis and does not provide all of the required information. A subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA) might be done in place of the PHA, but this is not recommended since the subsystem hazard analysis is a more detailed analysis primarily of faults and failures that can create safety hazards. A modified failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) could be used as a PHA, but this is not recommended since the failure mode and effects analysis primarily looks at failure modes only, while the preliminary hazard analysis considers many more system aspects. Use of the preliminary hazard analysis technique is highly recommended for every program, regardless of size or cost, to support the goal of identifying and mitigating all system hazards early in the program. The preliminary hazard analysis is the starting point for further hazard analysis and safety tasks, is easily performed, and identifies a majority of the system hazards. The preliminary hazard analysis is a primary system safety hazard analysis technique for a system safety program. 5.3 HISTORY The preliminary hazard analysis technique was established very early in the history of the system safety discipline. It was formally instituted and promulgated by the developers of MIL-STD-882. It was originally called a gross hazard analysis (GHA) because it was performed at a gross (preliminary) level of detail (see MIL-S-38130). Figure 5.1 shows an overview of the basic preliminary hazard analysis process and summarizes the import-ant relationships involved in the preliminary hazard analysis process. The preliminary hazard analysis process consists of utilizing both design information and known hazard information to identify and evaluate hazards and to identify SC factors that are relevant to design safety. The preliminary hazard analysis evaluates hazards identified by the preliminary hazard list analysis in further detail. The purpose of the preliminary hazard analysis is to identify hazards, hazard causal factors, hazard mis-hap risk, and SSRs to mitigate hazards with unacceptable risk during the preliminary design phase of system development. To perform the preliminary hazard analysis analysis, the system safety analyst must have three things—design knowledge, hazard knowledge, and the PHL. Design knowledge means the analyst must possess a basic understanding of the system design, including a list of major components. Hazard knowledge means the analyst needs a basic understanding about hazards, hazard sources, hazard components (hazard element, initiating mechanism, and target/threat) and hazards in similar systems. Hazard knowledge is primarily derived from hazard checklists and from lessons learned on the same or similar systems. The starting point for the preliminary hazard analysis is the preliminary hazard list collection of identified hazards. The preliminary hazard analysis evaluates these hazards in more detail. In addition, the analyst compares the design knowledge and information to hazard checklists in order to identify previously unfore-seen hazards. This allows the analyst to visualize or postulate possible hazards. For example, if the analyst discovers that the system design will be using jet fuel, he then compares jet fuel to a hazard checklist. From the hazard checklist it will be obvious that jet fuel is a hazardous element, and that a jet fuel fire/explosion is a potential mishap with many different ignition sources presenting many different hazards. Output from the preliminary hazard analysis includes identified and suspected hazards, hazard causal factors, the resulting mishap effect, mishap risk, SCFs, and TLMs. preliminary hazard analysis output also includes design methods and SSRs established to eliminate and/or mitigate identified hazards. It is important to identify SCFs because these are the areas that generally affect design safety and that are usually involved in major system hazards. Since the preliminary hazard analysis is initiated very early in the design phase, the data available to the analyst may be incomplete and informal (i.e., preliminary). Therefore, the analysis process should be structured to permit continual revision and updating as the conceptual approach is modified and refined. When the subsystem design details are complete enough to allow the analyst to begin the subsystem hazard analysis in detail, the preliminary hazard analysis is generally terminated. 5.5 METHODOLOGY The preliminary hazard analysis methodology is shown in Figure 5.2. This process uses design and hazard information to stimulate hazard and causal factor identification. The preliminary hazard analysis analysis begins with hazards identified from the PHL. The next step is to once again employ the use of hazard checklists (as done in the preliminary hazard list analysis) and undesired mishap checklists. The basic inputs for the preliminary hazard analysis include the functional flow diagram, the reliability block diagram, indentured equipment list, system design, preliminary hazard list hazards, hazard checklists, and mishap checklists—the first three of these are derived from the system design by the various system design organizations. Refer to Chapter 4, on preliminary hazard list analysis, for examples of each of these hazard checklists. Appendix C of this book contains a more complete set of hazard checklists that can be used in a PHA. Table 5.1 lists and describes the basic steps of the preliminary hazard analysis process. This process involves analyzing PHL-identified hazards in more detail and performing a detailed analysis of the system against hazard checklists. When performing a PHA, the following factors should be considered, as a minimum: 1. Hazardous components (e.g., energy sources, fuels, propellants, explosives, pressure systems, etc.) 2. Subsystem interfaces (e.g., signals, voltages, timing, human interaction, hardware, etc.) 3. System compatibility constraints (e.g., material compatibility, electromagnetic interference, transient current, ionizing radiation, etc.) 4. Environmental constraints (e.g., drop, shock, extreme temperatures, noise and health hazards, fire, electrostatic discharge, lightning, X-ray, electromagnetic radiation, laser radiation, etc.) 5. Undesired states (e.g., inadvertent activation, fire/explosive initiation and propagation, failure to safe, etc.) 6. Malfunctions to the system, subsystems, or computing system 7. Software errors (e.g., programming errors, programming omissions, logic errors, etc.) 8. Operating, test, maintenance, and emergency procedures 9. Human error (e.g., operator functions, tasks, requirements, etc.) 10. Crash and survival safety (e.g., egress, rescue, salvage, etc.) 11. Life-cycle support (e.g., demilitarization/disposal, EOD, surveillance, handling, transportation, storage, etc.) 12. Facilities, support equipment, and training 13. Safety equipment and safeguards (e.g., interlocks, system redundancy, failsafe design considerations, subsystem protection, fire suppression systems, personal protective equipment, warning labels, etc.) 14. Protective clothing, equipment, or devices 15. Training and certification pertaining to safe operation and maintenance of the system 16. System phases (test, manufacture, operations, maintenance, transportation, storage, disposal, etc.) 5.6 WORKSHEET The preliminary hazard analysis is a detailed hazard analysis utilizing structure and rigor. It is desirable to perform the preliminary hazard analysis using a specialized worksheet. Although the format of the preliminary hazard analysis analysis worksheet is not critical, it is important that, as a minimum, the preliminary hazard analysis generate the following information: 1. System hazards 2. Hazard effects (e.g., actions, outcomes, mishaps) 3. Hazard causal factors (or potential causal factor areas) 4. Mishap risk assessment (before and after design safety features are implemented) 5. SCFs and TLMs 6. Recommendations for eliminating or mitigating the hazards Figure 5.3 shows the columnar format preliminary hazard analysis worksheet recommended for state safety program usage. This particular worksheet format has proven to be useful and effective in many applications and it provides all of the information necessary from a PHA. The following instructions describe the information required under each column entry of the preliminary hazard analysis worksheet: 1. System This entry identifies the system under analysis. 2. Subsystem/Function analysis. This entry identifies the subsystem or function under analysis 3. Analyst This entry identifies the name of the preliminary hazard analysis analyst. 4. Date This entry identifies the date of the analysis. 5. Hazard Number This column identifies the number assigned to the identified hazard in the preliminary hazard analysis (e.g., PHA-1, PHA-2, etc.). This is for future reference to the particular hazard source and may be used, for example, in the hazard action record (HAR) and the hazard tracking system (HTS). 6. Hazard This column identifies the specific hazard being postulated and evaluated. (Remember: Document all hazard considerations, even if they are later proven to be nonhazardous.) 7. Causes This column identifies conditions, events, or faults that could cause the hazard to exist and the events that can trigger the hazardous elements to become a mishap or accident. 8. Effects This column identifies the effects and consequences of the hazard, should it occur. Generally, the worst-case result is the stated effect. The effect ultimately identifies and describes the potential mishap involved. 9. Mode This entry identifies the system mode(s) of operation, or operational phases, where the identified hazard is of concern. 10. Initial Mishap Risk Index (IMRI) This column provides a qualitative measure of mishap risk significance for the potential effect of the identified hazard, given that no mitigation techniques are applied to the hazard. Risk measures are a combination of mishap severity and probability, and the recommended values from MIL-STD-882 are shown below. 11. Recommended Action This column establishes recommended preventive measures to eliminate or mitigate the identified hazards. Recommendations generally take the form of guideline safety requirements from existing sources or a proposed mitigation method that is eventually translated into a new derived system safety requirements intended to mitigate the hazard. SSRs are generated after coordination with the design and requirements organizations. Hazard mitigation methods should follow the preferred order of precedence established in MIL-STD-882 for invoking or developing safety requirements, which is shown below. Order of Precedence 1. Eliminate hazard through design selection. 2. Incorporate safety devices. 3. Provide warning devices. 4. Develop procedures and training. 12. Final Mishap Risk Index (FMRI) This column provides a qualitative measure of mishap risk for the potential effect of the identified hazard, given that mitigation techniques and safety requirements are applied to the hazard. The same risk matrix table used to evaluate column 10 is also used here. 13. Comments This column provides a place to record useful information regarding the hazard or the analysis process that are not noted elsewhere. This column can be used to record the final system safety requirements number for the developed SSR, which will later be used for traceability. 14. Status This column states the current status of the hazard, as being either open or closed. The following are some basic guidelines that should be followed when completing the preliminary hazard analysis worksheet: 1. Remember that the objective of the preliminary hazard analysis is to identify system hazards, effects, causal factor areas, and risk. Another by-product of the preliminary hazard analysis is the identification of TLMs and SCFs. 2. Start by listing and systematically evaluating system hardware subsystems, system functions, and system energy sources on separate worksheet pages. For each of these categories identify hazards that may cause the TLMs ident-ified from the PHL. Also, utilize hazard checklists to identify new TLMs and hazards. 3. preliminary hazard list hazards must be converted to TLMs for the PHA. Utilize TLMs along with hazard checklists and lessons learned for hazard recognition to identify hazards. 4. Do not worry about reidentifying the same hazard when evaluating system hardware, system functions, and system energy sources. The idea is to provide thorough coverage in order to identify all hazards. 5. Expand each identified hazard in more detail to identify causal factors, effects, and risk. 6. As causal factors and effects are identified, hazard risk can be determined or estimated. 7. Continue to establish TLMs and SCFs as the preliminary hazard analysis progresses and utilize in the analysis. 8. A hazard write-up in the preliminary hazard analysis worksheet should be clear and understandable with as much information necessary to understand the hazard. 9. The preliminary hazard list hazard column does not have to contain all three elements of a hazard: hazardous element (HE), initiating mechanisms (IMs) and outcome (O). The combined columns of the preliminary hazard analysis worksheet can contain all three com-ponents of a hazard. For example, it is acceptable to place the HE in the hazard section, the IMs in the cause section, and the O in the effect section. The hazard, causes, and effects columns should together completely describe the hazard. 10. Use analysis airborne integrated data system to help recognize and identify new hazards, such as hazard checklists, lesson learned from hazard databases and libraries, mishap inves-tigations, and the like. Also, use applicable hazards from the preliminary hazard analysis of other similar systems. 11. After performing the PHA, review the preliminary hazard list hazards to ensure all have been covered via the top-level mishap process. This is because the preliminary hazard list hazards were not incorporated one for one. Figure 5.4 shows how to apply the preliminary hazard analysis guidelines when using the preliminary hazard analysis worksheet. 5.8 EXAMPLE: ACE MISSILE SYSTEM To demonstrate the preliminary hazard analysis methodology, the same hypothetical Ace Missile System from Chapter 4 will be used. The basic preliminary design is shown in Figure 5.5, however, note that the conceptual design changed slightly from the concept phase to the preliminary design phase (as happens in many development programs). The design concept has now expanded from a single missile system to multiple missiles in launch tubes. These changes will be reflected in the PHA. The major segments of the system are the missile segment and the weapon control system (WCS) segment. During preliminary design development, the system design has been modified and improved to include the following: 1. Multiple missiles instead of a single missile. 2. The missiles are now contained in launch tubes. 3. A radio transmitter was added to weapon control system design for missile destruct subsystem. Figure 5.6 lists the major system components, functions, phases, and energy sources that should be considered for the PHA. This is the typical level of information available for the PHA. Figure 5.6 contains a preliminary indentured equipment list (IEL) for this system that will be used for the conduct of the PHA. This is the level of information typically available during preliminary design. As the design development progresses, the IEL will be expanded in breadth and depth for the subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA). The IEL is basically a hierarchy of equipment that establishes relation-ships, interfaces, and equipment types. A new preliminary hazard analysis worksheet page will be started for each IEL item. Sometimes a more detailed hierarchy is available at the time of the PHA, but usually it is not. The basic ground rule is that the higher level of detail goes into the PHA, and the more detailed breakdown goes into the SSHA. Sometimes the decision is quite obvious, while at other times the decision is somewhat arbitrary. In this example, the computer software would be included in the preliminary hazard analysis only as a general category, and it would also be included in the subsystem hazard analysis when the indenture list is continued to a lower level of detail for the software (e.g., module level). The preliminary hazard analysis will analyze the system at the subsystem level because that is the level of design detail available. The subsystem hazard analysis will utilize the preliminary hazard analysis hazards and carry the analysis a level lower as more design detail becomes available. It is also helpful when performing the preliminary hazard analysis to utilize functional flow diagrams (FFDs) of the system if they are available. The functional flow diagram shows the steps that must take place in order to perform a particular system function. The functional flow diagram helps identify subsystem interfaces and relationships that can be used in the analysis. Sometimes it is necessary for the system safety analyst to develop both IELs and FFDs if the project design team has not developed them. Figure 5.7 is an functional flow diagram showing the basic planned operational phases for the missile system. As design development progresses, each of these phases will be expanded in greater detail. Figure 5.8 is an functional flow diagram showing the elements and sequence of events required to generate the missile launch signal. Figure 5.9 is an functional flow diagram showing the elements and sequence of events required to generate the missile launch signal. The hazards identified by the preliminary hazard list analysis form the initial set of hazards for the PHA. Since the preliminary hazard list hazards are generalized, brief, and mixed, it is better to condense the preliminary hazard list hazards to TLMs and then use the TLMs for the hazard categories that the preliminary hazard analysis should be considering for all aspects of the system design and operation. Table 5.2 contains the list of TLMs resulting from the preliminary hazard list analysis in Chapter 4. If a new preliminary hazard analysis worksheet were started for every IEL item, system function, and system energy source, there would be a minimum of 26 worksheets (14 IEL items þ 7 functions þ 5 energy sources). In order to not overwhelm the reader, only 6 worksheets are provided (5 IEL items and 1 function). These samples should provide sufficient information on how to perform the PHA. These same examples will be carried into the SSHA. Tables 5.3 through 5.8 contain five example work-sheets from the example missile system PHA. The following should be noted from the preliminary hazard analysis of the Ace Missile System: 1. The recommended action is not always in the form of a direct SSR. Additional research may be necessary to convert the recommendation into a meaningful design requirement. 2. As a result of the PHA, top-level mishap 10 was added to the list of TLMs. The new TLM. list is shown in Table 5.9. 5.9 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES The following are advantages of the preliminary hazard analysis technique. The PHA: 1. Is easily and quickly performed. 2. Is comparatively inexpensive yet provides meaningful results. 3. Provides rigor for focusing for the identification and evaluation of hazards. 4. Is a methodical analysis technique. 5. Identifies the majority of system hazards and provides an indication of system risk. 6. Commercial software is available to assist in the preliminary hazard analysis process. While there are no disadvantages in the preliminary hazard analysis technique, it is sometimes improperly depended upon as the only hazard analysis technique that is applied. 5.10 COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID When first learning how to perform a PHA, it is commonplace to commit some typical errors. The following is a list of common errors made during the conduct of a PHA. 1. Not listing all concerns or credible hazards. It is important to list all possible suspected or credible hazards and not leave any potential concerns out of the analysis. 2. Failure to document hazards identified but found to be not credible. The preliminary hazard analysis is a historical document encompassing all hazard identification areas that were considered. 3. Not utilizing a structured approach of some type. Always use a worksheet and include all equipment, energy sources, functions, and the like. 4. Not collecting and utilizing common hazard source checklists. 5. Not researching similar systems or equipment for mishaps and lessons learned that can be applied. 6. Not establishing a correct list of hardware, functions, and mission phases. 7. Assuming the reader will understand the hazard description from a brief abbreviated statement filled with project-unique terms and acronyms. 8. Inadequately describing the identified hazard (insufficient detail, too much detail, incorrect hazard effect, wrong equipment indenture level, not identifying all three elements of a hazard, etc.). 9. Inadequately describing the causal factors (the identified causal factor does not support the hazard, the causal factor is not detailed enough, not all of the causal factors are identified, etc.). 10. Inadequately describing the hazard mishap risk index (MRI). For example, the MRI is not stated or is incomplete, the hazard severity level does not sup-port actual hazardous effects, the final MRI is a higher risk than the initial MRI, the final severity level in the risk is less than the initial severity level (sometimes possible, but not usually), or the hazard probability is not supported by the causal factors. 11. Providing recommended hazard mitigation methods that do not address the actual causal factor(s). 12. Incorrectly closing the hazard. 13. The preliminary hazard analysis is initiated beyond the preliminary design stage or the preliminary hazard analysis is continued beyond the preliminary design stage. 14. Not establishing and utilizing a list of TLMs and SCFs. This chapter discussed the preliminary hazard analysis technique. The following are basic principles that help summarize the discussion in this chapter: 1. The preliminary hazard analysis is an analysis tool for identifying system hazards, causal factors, mishap risk, and safety recommendations for mitigating risk. It is based upon preliminary design information. 2. The primary purpose of the preliminary hazard analysis is to identify and mitigate hazards early in the design development process in order to influence the design when the cost impact is minimal. 3. The use of a specialized worksheet provides structure and rigor to the preliminary hazard analysis process. 4. The use of a functional flow diagram, reliability block diagram, and an indentured equipment list greatly airborne integrated data system and simplifies the preliminary hazard analysis process. 5. Do not exclude any thoughts, ideas, or concerns when postulating hazards. In addition to identifying real hazards, it is also important to show that certain hazards were suspected and considered, even though they were later found to not be possible for various design reasons. This provides evidence that all possibilities were considered. 6. Write a full, credible, and meaningful hazard description that is understand-able to the reader and not just to the analyst. Do not assume the reader under-stands the hazard from a brief abbreviated statement filled with project-unique terms and acronyms. 7. Identify the three elements comprising a hazard using the preliminary hazard analysis worksheet columns: Hazard Column Hazardous element (source). Causes Column Initiating mechanism (mechanism). Effects Column Target/threat (outcome)