We live in a world comprised of systems and risk. When viewed from an engineering perspective, most aspects of life involve systems. For example, houses are a type of system, automobiles are a type of system, and electrical power grids are another type of system. Commercial aircraft are systems that operate within an economical transportation system and a worldwide airspace control system. Systems have become a necessity for modern living. With systems and technology also comes exposure to mishaps because systemscan fail or work improperly, resulting in damage, injury, and deaths. The possibility that a system fails and results in death, injury, damage, and the like is called mishap risk. For example, there is the danger that a traffic light will fail, resulting in the mishap of another automatic colliding with your auto. Automobiles, traffic, and traffic lights form a unique system that we use daily, and we accept the mishap risk potential because the risk is small. There is the danger that the gas furnace in our house will fail and explode, resulting in a burned house's mishap, or worse. This is another unique system, with known adverse side effects that we choose to live with because the mishap risk is small and the benefits are great.Our lives are intertwined within a web of different systems, each of which can affect our safety. Each of hese systems has a unique design and a unique set of components. In addition, each of these systems contains inherent hazards that present unique mishap risks. We are always making a trade-off between accepting the benefits of a system versus the mishap risk it presents. As we develop and build systems, we should be concerned about eliminating and reducing mishap risk. Some risks are so small that they can easily be accepted, while other risks are so large they must be dealt with immediately. Mishap risk is usually small and acceptable when system design control (i.e., system safety) is applied during the development of the system. Risks are akin to the invisible radio signals that fill the air around us, in that some are loud and clear, some very faint, and some are distorted and unclear. Life, as well as safety, is a matter of knowing, understanding, and choosing the risk to accept.System safety is the formal process of identifying and controlling mishap risk. As systems become more complex and more hazardous, more effort is required to understand and manage system mishap risk.The key to system safety and effective risk management is identifying and mitigating hazards. To successfully control hazards, it is necessary to understand hazards and know how to identify them. The purpose of this book is to better understand hazards and the tools and techniques for identifying them, in order that they can be effectively controlled during the development of a system.The ideal objective of system safety is to develop a system free of hazards. However, absolute safety is not possible because complete freedomfromall hazardous conditions is not always possible, particularly when dealing with complex inherently hazardous systems, such as weapons systems, nuclear power plants, and commercial aircraft. Since it is generally not possible to eliminate all hazards, the realistic objective becomes that of developing a system with acceptable mishap risk. This is accomplished by identifying potential hazards, assessing their risks, and implementing corrective actions to eliminate or mitigate the identified hazards. This involves a systematic approach to the management of mishap risk. Safety is a basic part of the risk management process. Hazards will always exist, but their risk must and can be made acceptable. Therefore, safety is a relative term that implies a level of risk that is measurable and acceptable. System safety is not an absolute quantity, but rather an optimized level of mishap risk management that is constrained by cost, time, and operational effectiveness (performance). System safety requires that risk be evaluated, and the level of risk accepted or rejected by an appropriate decision authority. Mishap risk management is the basic process of system safety engineering and management functions.System safety is a process of disciplines and controls employed from the initial system design concepts, through detailed design and testing, to system disposal at the completion of its useful life (i.e., “cradle to grave” or “womb to tomb”). The fundamental objective of system safety is to identify, eliminate or control, and document system hazards. System safety encompasses all the ideals of mishap risk management and design for safety; it is a discipline for hazard identification and control to an acceptable level of risk. Safety is a system attribute that must be intentionally designed into a product. From an historical perspective it has been learned that a proactive preventive approach to safety during system design and development is much more cost effective than trying to add safety into a system after the occurrence of an accident or mishap. System safety is an initial investment that saves future losses that could result from potential mishaps.System safety is the process of managing the system, personnel, environmental, andhealth mishap risks encountered in the design development, test, production, use,and disposal of systems, subsystems, equipment, materials, and facilities.A system safety program (SSP) is a formal approach to eliminate hazards throughengineering, design, education, management policy, and supervisory control of conditionsand practices. It ensures the accomplishment of the appropriate system safetymanagement and engineering tasks. The formal system safety process has beenprimarily established by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) and its militarybranches and promulgated by MIL-STD-882. However, this same process is also followedin private industry for the development of commercial products, such as commercialaircraft, rail transportation, nuclear power, and automobiles, to mention just a few.The goal of system safety is the protection of life, systems, equipment, and theenvironment. The basic objective is the elimination of hazards that can result indeath, injury, system loss, and damage to the environment. When hazard eliminationis not possible, the next objective is to reduce the risk of a mishap through designcontrol measures. Reducing mishap risk is achieved by reducing the probabilityof the mishap and/or the severity of the mishap.This objective can be attained at minimum cost when the state safety program is implementedearly in the conceptual phase and is continued throughout the system developmentand acquisition cycle. The overall complexity of today’s systems, particularly weaponssystems, is such that system safety is required in order to consciously preventmishaps and accidents. Added to complexity is the inherent danger of energeticmaterials, the effects of environments, and the complexities of operational requirements.In addition, consideration must be given to hardware failures, human error,software interfaces, including programming errors, and vagaries of the environment.System safety is defined in MIL-STD-882D as follows:The application of engineering and management principles, criteria, and techniques toachieve acceptable mishap risk, within the constraints of operational effectiveness andsuitability, time, and cost, throughout all phases of the system life cycle.The intent of system safety is mishap risk management through hazard identificationand mitigation techniques. System safety engineering is an element of systemsengineering involving the application of scientific and engineering principlesfor the timely identification of hazards and initiation of those actions necessary toprevent or control hazards within the system. It draws upon professional knowledgeand specialized skills in the mathematical and scientific disciplines, together withthe principles and methods of engineering design and analysis to specify, predict,evaluate, and document the safety of the system. System safety management is an element of program management that ensures accomplishment of the correct mix of system safety tasks. This includes identification of system safety requirements; planning, organizing, and controlling those efforts that are directed toward achieving the safety goals; coordinating with other program elements; and analyzing, reviewing, and evaluating the program to ensure effective and timely realization of the system safety objectives. The basic concept of system safety is that it is a formal process of intentionally designing in safety by designing out hazards or reducing the mishap risk of hazards. It is a proactive process performed throughout the system life cycle to save lives and resources by intentionally reducing the likelihood of mishaps to an insignificant level. The system life cycle is typically defined as the stages of concept, preliminary design, detailed design, test, manufacture, operation, and disposal (demilitarization). In order to be proactive, safety must begin when system development first begins at the conceptual stage. The goal of system safety is to ensure the detection of hazards to the fullest extent possible and provide for the introduction of protective measures early enough in system development to avoid design changes late in the program. A safe design is a prerequisite for safe operations. Things that can go wrong with systems are predictable, and something that is predictable is also preventable. As Murphy’s law states “whatever can go wrong, will go wrong.” The goal of system safety is to find out what can go wrong (before it does) and establish controls to prevent it or reduce the probability of occurrence. This is accomplished through hazard identification and mitigation. MIL-STD-882D establishes the core system safety process in eight principal steps, which are shown in Figure 1.1. The core system safety process involves establishing an state safety program to implement the mishap risk management process. The state safety program is formally documented in the system safety program plan (SSPP), which specifies all of the safety tasks that will be performed, including the specific hazard analyses, reports, and so forth. As hazards are identified, their risk will be assessed, and hazard mitigation methods will be established to mitigate the risk as determined necessary. Hazard mitigation methods are implemented into system design via system safety requirements (SSRs). All identified hazards are converted into hazard action records (HARs) and placed into a hazard tracking system (HTS). Hazards are continually tracked in the hazard tracking system until they can be closed. It can be seen from the core system safety process that safety revolves around hazards. Hazard identification and elimination/mitigation is the key to this process. Therefore, it is critical that the system safety analyst understand hazards, hazard identification, and hazard mitigation. The core system safety process can be reduced to the process shown in Figure 1.2. This is a mishap risk management process whereby safety is achieved through the identification of hazards, the assessment of hazard mishap risk, and the control of hazards presenting unacceptable risk. This is a closed-loop process whereby hazards are identified and tracked until acceptable closure action is implemented and verified. It should be performed in conjunction with actual system development, in order that the design can be influenced during the design process, rather than trying to enforce design changes after the system is developed. System safety involves a life-cycle approach based on the idea that mishap and accident prevention measures must be initiated as early as possible in the life of a system and carried through to the end of its useful life. It is usually much cheaper and more effective to design safety features into an item of equipment than it is to add the safety features when the item is in production or in the field. Also, experience indicates that that some of the hazards in a newly designed system will escape detection, no matter how aggressive the safety program. Therefore, the safety program for a systemmust remain active throughout the life of the system to ensure that safety problems are recognized whenever they arise and that appropriate corrective action is taken. The key to system safety is the management of hazards. To effectively manage hazards, one must understand hazard theory and the identification of hazards. The purpose of this book is to better understand hazards and the tools and techniques for identifying them. When hazards are identified and understood, they can then be properly eliminated or mitigated. System Model As implied in the name, system safety is involved with “systems” and with the many different characteristics and attributes associated with systems. Therefore, in order to effectively apply the system safety process, it is necessary to completely understand the term system and all of its ramifications. This includes understanding what comprises a system, how a system operates, system analysis tools, the life cycle of a system, and the system development process. A proactive and preventive safety process can only be effectively implemented if the proper system-oriented safety tasks are performed during the appropriate system life-cycle phases, in conjunction with utilizing the appropriate system engineering tools. The timing and content of safety tasks must coincide with certain system development domains to ensure safety success. The standard definition of a system from MIL-STD-882 is: A system is a composite, at any level of complexity, of personnel, procedures, materials, tools, equipment, facilities, and software. The elements of this composite entity are used together in the intended operational or support environment to perform a given task or achieve a specific purpose, support, or mission requirement. Essentially a system is a combination of subsystems interconnected to accomplish the system objective. A subsystem is a subset of the system that could include equipment, components, personnel, facilities, processes, documentation, procedures, and software interconnected in the system to perform a specific function that contributes to accomplishing the system objective. The system objective is a desired result to be accomplished by the system. The system objective defines the purpose for the system. System functions are the operations the system must perform in order to accomplish its objective. System functions are generally performed by subsystems and define how the system operates. Figure 1.3 depicts the generic concept of a system. This diagram shows a system comprised of many subsystems, with an interface between each subsystem. The system has an objective and is surrounded by a boundary and an environment. System safety analysis involves evaluation of all system aspects, including functions, subsystems, interfaces, boundaries, and environments and the overall system itself. System Attributes Systems have many different attributes of interest to system safety. Defining and understanding a system’s key attributes is necessary because they provide the framework for designing, building, operating, and analyzing systems. Key system attributes are shown in Table 1.1, where the major attribute categories are listed on the top row, with subelements identified below. Each of these attributes is usually addressed in system safety hazard analyses at some point in the system development program. Each of the system attributes must be understood in order to perform a complete and thorough hazard analysis. Examples of safety considerations for the elements attribute are as follows: . Hardware Failure modes, hazardous energy sources . Software Design errors, design incompatibilities . Personnel Human error, human injury, human control interface . Environment Weather, external equipment . Procedures Instructions, tasks, warning notes . Interfaces Erroneous input/output, unexpected complexities . Functions Fail to perform, performs erroneously . Facilities Building faults, storage compatibility, transportation faults. An state safety program must adequately address each of these system attributes in order to ensure that an optimum degree of safety is achieved in the system. All of the system elements and their interrelationships must be considered in the safety analyses, assessments, and evaluations to ensure it truly is a system safety analysis. For example, it is possible for each operational phase or mode to have a different and/or significant impact upon system safety. Different functions are performed during each phase that could have a direct impact on subsequent phases. During certain phases safety barriers or interlocks are often removed, making the system more susceptible to the occurrence of a hazard, for example, at one point in the operational mission of a missile, the missile is powered and armed. This means that fewer potential failures are now necessary in order for a mishap to occur, and there are fewer safeguards activated in place to prevent hazards from occurring. System Types The types of systems dealt with in system safety are typically physical, human-made objects comprised of hardware, software, user interfaces, and procedures. These types of systems include ships, weapons, electrical power, railroads, aircraft, and the like that are used for some specific purpose or objective. Table 1.2 provides some example systems, showing their intended purpose and some of the subsystems comprising these systems. It is interesting to note that many of the systems are comprised of similar types of subsystems, which means that they may have similar types of hazards. Understanding system type and scope is very important in system safety and hazard analysis. The system type can be an indication of the safety criticality involved. The scope of the system boundaries establishes the size and depth of the system. The system limitations describe basically what the system can and cannot safely do. Certain limitations may require the system to include special design safety features. Every system operates within one or more different environments. The specific environment establishes what the potential hazardous impact will be on the system. System criticality establishes the overall safety rating for the system. A nuclear power plant system has a high consequence safety rating, whereas a TV set as a system has a much lower safety criticality rating. System Life Cycle The system life cycle involves the actual phases a system goes through from concept through disposal. This system life cycle is analogous to the human life cycle of conception, birth, childhood, adulthood, death, and burial. The life cycle of a system is very generic and generally a universal standard. The system life-cycle stages are generally condensed and summarized into the five major phases shown in Figure 1.4. All aspects of the system life cycle will fit into one of these major categories. The life-cycle stages of a system are important divisions in the evolution of a product and are therefore very relevant to the system safety process. Safety tasks are planned and referenced around these five phases. In order to proactively design safety into a product, it is essential that the safety process start at the concept definition phase and continue throughout the life cycle. Phase 1: Concept Definition This phase involves defining and evaluating a potential system concept in terms of feasibility, cost, and risk. The overall project goals and objectives are identified during this basic concept evaluation phase. Design requirements, functions, and end results are formulated. The basic system is roughly designed, along with a thumbnail sketch of the subsystems required and how they will interact. During this phase, safety is concerned with hazardous components and functions that must be used in the system. The system safety program plan (SSPP) is generally started during this phase to outline the overall system risk and safety tasks, including hazard analyses that must be performed. Phase 2: Development and Test This phase involves designing, developing, and testing the actual system. Development proceeds from preliminary through detailed tasks. The development phase is generally broken into the following stages: Preliminary Design Initial basic design . Detailed Design Final detailed design . Test System testing to ensure all requirements are met The preliminary design translates the initial concept into a workable design. During this phase subsystems, components, and functions are identified and established. Design requirements are then written to define the systems, subsystems, and software. Some testing of design alternatives may be performed. During this phase, safety is concerned with hazardous system designs, hazardous components/ materials, and hazardous functions that can ultimately lead to mishaps and actions to eliminate/mitigate the hazards. The preliminary design evolves into the final detailed design. The final design of the system involves completing development of the design specifications, sketches, drawings, and system processes and all subsystem designs. During the final design phase, safety is concerned with hazardous designs, failure modes, and human errors that can ultimately lead to mishaps during the life cycle of the system. The system test phase involves verification and validation testing of the design to ensure that all design requirements are met and are effective. In addition, safety is concerned with potential hazards associated with the conduct of the test and additional system hazards identified during testing. Phase 3: Production The final approved design is transformed into the operational end product during the production phase. During this phase, safety is concerned with safe production procedures, human error, tools, methods, and hazardous materials. Phase 4: Operation The end product is put into actual operation by the user(s) during the operation phase. This phase includes use and support functions such as transportation/handling, storage/stowage, modification, and maintenance. The operational phase can last for many years, and during this phase performance and technology upgrades are likely. Safe system operation and support are the prime safety concerns during this phase. Safety concerns during this phase include operator actions, hardware failures, hazardous system designs, and safe design changes and system upgrades. Phase 5: Disposal This phase completes the useful life of the product. It involves disposing of the system in its entirety or individual elements, following completion of its useful life. This stage involves phase-out, deconfiguration, or decommissioning where the product is torn down, dismantled, or disassembled. Safe disassembly procedures and safe disposal of hazardous materials are safety concerns during this phase. Normally each of these life-cycle phases occurs sequentially, but occasionally development tasks are performed concurrently, spirally, or incrementally to shorten the development process. Regardless of the development process used, sequential, concurrent, spiral, or incremental, the system life-cycle phases basically remain the same. System Development System development is the process of designing, developing, and testing a system design until the final product meets all requirements and fulfills all objectives. System development consists primarily of phases 1 and 2 of the system life cycle. It is during the development stages that system safety is “designed into” the product for safe operational usage. Figure 3.13 shows the five system life-cycle phases, with phase 2 expanded into preliminary design, final design, and test. These are the most significant phases for applying system safety. There are several different models by which a system can be developed. Each of these models has advantages and disadvantages, but they all achieve the same end— development of a system. These development models include: Engineering Development Model This is the standard traditional approach that has been in use for many years. This method performs the system life-cycle phases sequentially. The development and test phase is subdivided into preliminary design, final design, and test for more refinement. Under this model, each phase must be complete and successful before the next phase is entered. This method normally takes the longest length of time because the system is developed in sequential stages. Three major design reviews are conducted for exit from one phase and entry into the next. These are the system design review (SDR), preliminary design review (PDR), and critical design review (CDR). These design reviews are an important aspect of the hazard analysis types discussed in Chapter 3. Figure 1.5 depicts the traditional engineering development model. Concurrent Engineering This method performs several of the development tasks concurrently in an attempt to save development time. This method has a higher probability for technical risk problems since some items are in preproduction before full development and testing. Spiral Development In the spiral development process, a desired capability is identified, but the end-state requirements are not known at program initiation. Requirements are refined through demonstration, risk management, and continuous user feedback. Each increment provides the best possible capability, but the requirements for future increments depend on user feedback and technology maturation. Incremental Development In the incremental development process, a desired capability is identified, an end-state requirement is known, and that requirement is met over time by developing several increments, each dependent on available mature technology. This method breaks the development process into incremental stages in order to reduce development risk. Basic designs, technologies, and methods are developed and proven before more detailed designs are developed. 1. The goal of system safety is to save lives and preserve resources by preventing mishaps. 2. Mishaps can be predicted and controlled through the system safety process. 3. The focus of system safety is on hazards, mishaps, and mishap risk. 4. Hazard analysis is essential because hazards are the key to preventing or mitigating mishaps. 5. System safety should be consistent with mission requirements, cost, and schedule. 6. System safety covers all system life-cycle phases, from “cradle to grave.” 7. System safety must be planned, proactive, integrated, comprehensive, and system oriented. In order to design in safety, hazards must be designed out (eliminated) or mitigated (reduced in risk). Hazard identification is a critical system safety function, and thus the correct understanding and appreciation of hazard theory is critical. This chapter focuses on what constitutes a hazard in order that hazards can be recognized and understood during the hazard identification, evaluation, and mitigation processes. Hazard analysis provides the basic foundation for system safety. Hazard analysis is performed to identify hazards, hazard effects, and hazard causal factors. Hazard analysis is used to determine system risk, to determine the significance of hazards, and to establish design measures that will eliminate or mitigate the identified hazards. Hazard analysis is used to systematically examine systems, subsystems, facilities, components, software, personnel, and their interrelationships, with consideration given to logistics, training, maintenance, test, modification, and operational environments. To effectively perform hazard analyses, it is necessary to understand what comprises a hazard, how to recognize a hazard, and how to define a hazard. To develop the skills needed to identify hazards and hazard causal factors, it is necessary to understand the nature of hazards, their relationship to mishaps, and their effect upon system design. Many important hazard-related concepts will be presented in this chapter, which will serve as building blocks for hazard analysis and risk evaluation. In sum and substance, humans inherently create the potential for mishaps. Potential mishaps exist as hazards, and hazards exist in system designs. Hazards are actually designed in to the systems we design, build, and operate. In order to perform hazard analysis, the analyst must first understand the nature of hazards. Hazards are predictable, and what can be predicted can also be eliminated or controlled. HAZARD-RELATED DEFINITIONS The overall system safety process is one of mishap risk management, whereby safety is achieved through the identification of hazards, the assessment of hazard mishap risk, and the control of hazards presenting unacceptable risk. This is a closed-loop process, where hazards are identified, mitigated, and tracked until acceptable closure action is implemented and verified. System safety should be performed in conjunction with actual system development in order that the design can be influenced by safety during the design development process, rather than trying to enforce more costly design changes after the system is developed. In theory this sounds simple, but in actual practice a common stumbling block is the basic concept of what comprises a hazard, a hazard causal factor (HCF), and a mishap. It is important to clearly understand the relationship between a hazard and an hazard causal factor when identifying, describing, and evaluating hazards. To better understand hazard theory, let us start by looking at some common safety-related definitions. Accident 1. An undesirable and unexpected event; a mishap; an unfortunate chance or event (dictionary). 2. Any unplanned act or event that results in damage to property, material, equipment, or cargo, or personnel injury or death when not the result of enemy action (Navy OP4 & OP5). Mishap 1. An unfortunate accident (dictionary). 2. An unplanned event or series of events resulting in death, injury, occupational illness, damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment (MIL-STD-882D). 3. An unplanned event or series of events resulting in death, injury, occupational illness, or damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment. Accident. (MIL-STD-882C). [Note the last word “accident” in the definition.] Hazard 1. To risk; to put in danger of loss or injury (dictionary). 2. Any real or potential condition that can cause injury, illness, or death to personnel; damage to or loss of a system, equipment or property; or damage to the environment (MIL-STD-882D). 3. A condition that is a prerequisite for an accident. Risk 1. Hazard; peril; jeopardy (dictionary). 2. An expression of the impact and possibility of a mishap in terms of potential mishap severity and probability of occurrence (MIL-STD-882D). Note both the differences and similarities between the above definitions. It should be apparent from these definitions that there is no significant differentiation between a mishap and an accident, and these terms can be used interchangeably. To be consistent with MIL-STD-882D terminology, the term mishap will be preferred over the term accident. The dictionary definition states that an accident or mishap is a random chance event, which gives a sense of futility by implying that hazards are unpredictable and unavoidable. System safety, on the other hand, is built upon the premise that mishaps are not random events; instead they are deterministic and controllable events. Mishaps and accidents do not just happen; they are the result of a unique set of conditions (i.e., hazards), which are predictable when properly analyzed. A hazard is a potential condition that can result in a mishap or accident, given that the hazard occurs. This means that mishaps can be predicted via hazard identification. And, mishaps can be prevented or controlled via hazard elimination, control, or mitigation measures. This viewpoint provides a sense of control over the systems we develop and utilize. HAZARD THEORY Per the system safety definitions, a mishap is an actual event that has occurred and resulted in death, injury, and/or loss; and a hazard is a potential condition that can potentially result in death, injury, and/or loss. These definitions lead to the principle that a hazard is the precursor to a mishap; a hazard defines a potential event (i.e., mishap), while a mishap is the occurred event. This means that there is a direct relationship between a hazard and a mishap, as depicted in Figure 2.1. The concept conveyed by Figure 2.1 is that a hazard and a mishap are two separate states of the same phenomenon, linked by a state transition that must occur. You can think of these states as the before and after states. A hazard is a “potential event” at one end of the spectrum that may be transformed into an “actual event” (the mishap) at the other end of the spectrum based upon the state transition. An analogy might be water, where water is one entity, but it can be in a liquid state or a frozen state, and temperature is the transitional factor. Figure 2.2 illustrates the hazard–mishap relationship from a different perspective. In this viewpoint, a hazard and a mishap are at opposite ends of the same entity. Again, some transitional event causes the change from the conditional hazard state to the actualized mishap state. Note that both states look almost the same, the difference being that the verb tense has changed from referring to a future potential event to referring to the present actualized event, where some loss or injury has been experienced. A hazard and a mishap are the same entity, only the state has changed, from a hypothesis to a reality. Mishaps are the immediate result of actualized hazards. The state transition from a hazard to a mishap is based on two factors: (1) the unique set of hazard components involved and (2) the mishap risk presented by the hazard components. The hazard components are the items comprising a hazard, and the mishap risk is the probability of the mishap occurring and the severity of the resulting mishap loss. Mishap risk is a fairly straightforward concept, where risk is defined as: Risk ¼ probability _ severity The mishap probability factor is the probability of the hazard components occurring and transforming into the mishap. The mishap severity factor is the overall consequence of the mishap, usually in terms of loss resulting from the mishap (i.e., the undesired outcome). Both probability and severity can be defined and assessed in either qualitative terms or quantitative terms. Time is factored into the risk concept through the probability calculation of a fault event. The hazard component concept is a little more complex in definition. A hazard is an entity that contains only the elements necessary and sufficient to result in a mishap. The components of a hazard define the necessary conditions for a mishap and the end outcome or effect of the mishap. A hazard is comprised of the following three basic components: 1. Hazardous Element (HE) This is the basic hazardous resource creating the impetus for the hazard, such as a hazardous energy source such as explosives being used in the system. 2. Initiating Mechanism (IM) This is the trigger or initiator event(s) causing the hazard to occur. The IM causes actualization or transformation of the hazard from a dormant state to an active mishap state. 3. Target and Threat (T/T) This is the person or thing that is vulnerable to injury and/or damage, and it describes the severity of the mishap event. This is the mishap outcome and the expected consequential damage and loss. The three components of a hazard form what is known in system safety as the hazard triangle, as illustrated in Figure 2.3. The hazard triangle illustrates that a hazard consists of three necessary and coupled components, each of which forms the side of a triangle. All three sides of the triangle are essential and required in order for a hazard to exist. Remove any one of the triangle sides and the hazard is eliminated because it is no longer able to produce a mishap (i.e., the triangle is incomplete). Reduce the probability of the IM triangle side and the mishap probability is reduced. Reduce an element in the HE or the T/T side of the triangle and the mishap severity is reduced. This aspect of a hazard is useful when determining where to mitigate a hazard. To demonstrate the hazard component concept, consider a detailed breakdown of the following example hazard: “Worker is electrocuted by touching exposed contacts in electrical panel containing high voltage.” Figure 2.4 shows how this hazard is divided into the three necessary hazard components. Note in this example that all three hazard components are present and can be clearly identified. In this particular example there are actually two IMs involved. The T/T defines the mishap outcome, while the combined HE and T/T define the mishap severity. The HE and IM are the HCFs and define the mishap probability. If the high-voltage component can be removed from the system, the hazard is eliminated. If the voltage can be reduced to a lower less harmful level, then the mishap severity is reduced. Key hazard theory concepts to remember are: . Hazards result in (i.e., cause) mishaps. . Hazards are (inadvertently) built into a system. . Hazards are recognizable by their components. . A design flaw can be a mishap waiting to happen. . A hazard will occur according to the hazard components involved. . A hazard is a deterministic entity and not a random event. . Hazards (and mishaps) are predictable and, therefore, are preventable or controllable. HAZARD ACTUATION Mishaps are the immediate result of actualized hazards. The state transition from a hazard to a mishap is based on two factors: (1) the unique set of hazard components involved and (2) the mishap risk presented by the hazard components. The hazard components are the items comprising a hazard, and the mishap risk is the probability of the mishap occurring and the severity of the resulting mishap loss. Figure 2.5 depicts a hazard using the analogy of a molecule, which is comprised of one or more atoms. The molecule represents a hazard, while the atoms represent the three types of components that make up the molecule. The concept is that a hazard is a unique entity, comprised of a unique set of components, similar to a molecule. This set of components consists of three specific required elements: an HE, IM, and T/T. All three specific elements are required, but each element can be one, or more, in quantity. The molecule model indicates that there is no particular order between the hazard components; they all merely exist within the hazard. When the components within the hazard are in a specific alignment, the hazard transitions from a conditional state to a mishap state. This viewpoint shows that all of the randomly oriented hazard components must line up (or occur) in the correct sequence before the mishap actually occurs. This cause for this sequence of events determines the mishap probability, while the T/T determines the mishap severity. The HE is always present, and the mishap occurs only when the IMs force the transition. Figure 2.6 presents another way of viewing the hazard–mishap relationship. The spinning wheels represent all of the components forming a particular hazard. Only when the timing is right, and all of the holes in the wheels line up perfectly, does the hazard move from a potential to an actual mishap. There are two key points to remember about the hazard–mishap transition process. One, there is generally some sort of energy buildup in the transition phase, which ultimately causes the mishap damage. Two, there is usually a point of no return for the mishap, where there is no possibility of it being reversed. Each individual hazard is unique, and therefore this time period is unique to every hazard. Figure 2.7 illustrates the hazard–mishap state transition. During the transition phase, the energy buildup occurs as the IMs are occurring. This could also be viewed as the elements of a function being completed, or a functional buildup occurring in a rapid or slow process. It is during this time period that the levels of safety are degrading and the transition process reaches a point of no return, where the hazard becomes irreversible. A system is designed and built to a specification for the purpose of performing an intended function or functions. But, a system can also contain an inherent design flaw that is capable of performing an unintended and undesirable function. It is this design flaw that provides the necessary events and conditions that comprise a hazard. Quite often this design flaw (hazard) is hidden from the designers because it is not always obvious. These hazards can only be discovered and identified through hazard analysis. Mishaps do not just happen, they are the result of design flaws inadvertently built into the system design. Thus, in a sense mishaps are predictable events. If a hazard is eliminated or mitigated, the corresponding mishap is also eliminated or controlled. Therefore, hazard identification and control, via hazard analysis, is the key to mishap prevention. HAZARD CAUSAL FACTORS There is a difference between why hazards exist and how they exist. The basic reason why hazards exist are: (1) They are unavoidable because hazardous elements must be used in the system, and/or (2) they are the result of inadequate design safety consideration. Inadequate design safety consideration results from poor or insufficient design or the incorrect implementation of a good design. This includes inadequate consideration given to the potential effect of hardware failures, sneak paths, software glitches, human error, and the like. HCFs are the specific items responsible for how a unique hazard exists in a system. Figure 2.8 depicts the overall hazard causal factor model. This model correlates all of the factors involved in hazard–mishap theory. The model illustrates that hazards create the potential for mishaps, and mishaps occur based on the level of risk involved (i.e., hazards and mishaps are linked by risk). The three basic hazard components define both the hazard and the mishap. The three basic hazard components can be further broken into major hazard causal factor categories, which are: (1) hardware, (2) software, (3) humans, (4) interfaces, (5) functions, and (6) the environment. Finally, the causal factor categories are refined even further into the actual specific detailed causes, such as a hardware component failure mode. Figure 2.8 illustrates how hazard HCFs can be viewed at three different levels: Level 1: Top Layer The three hazard components (HE, IM, T/T) Level 2: Midlevel The hazard causal factor categories [hardware, software, human system integration (HSI), environment, functions, interfaces] Level 3: Bottom Level The detailed specific causes (failure modes, errors, etc.) The top-level hazard hazard causal factor categories define the basic root cause sources for all hazards. The first step in hazard causal factor identification is to identify the category and then identify the detailed specifics in each category, such as specific hardware component failures, operator errors, software error, and the like. High-level hazards in a preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) might identify root causes at the hazard causal factor category level, while a more detailed analysis, such as the subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA), would identify the specific detailed causes at the component level, such as specific component failure modes. A hazard can be initially identified from the causal sources without knowing the specific detailed root causes. However, in order to determine the mishap risk and the hazard mitigation measures required, the specific detailed root causes must eventually be known. In summary, the basic principles of hazard–mishap theory are as follows: 1. Hazards cause mishaps; a hazard is a condition that defines a possible future event (i.e., mishap). 2. A hazard and a mishap are two different states of the same phenomenon (before and after). 3. Each hazard/mishap has its own inherent and unique risk (probability and severity). 4. A hazard is an entity comprised of three components (HE, IM, T/T). 5. TheHEandIMare theHCFs and they establish themishap probability risk factor. 6. The T/T along with parts of the HE and IM establish the mishap severity risk factor. 7. HCFs can be characterized on three different levels. 8. The probability of a hazard existing is either 1 or 0; however, the probability of a mishap is a function of the specific HCFs. A hazard is like a minisystem; it is a unique and discrete entity comprised of a unique set of HCFs and outcomes. A hazard defines the terms and conditions of a potential mishap; it is the wrapper containing the entire potential mishap description. The mishap that results is the product of the hazard components. HAZARD–MISHAP PROBABILITY A hazard has a probability of either 1 or 0 of existing (either it exists or it does not; the three components are present or they are not present). A mishap, on the other hand, has a probability somewhere between 1 and 0 of occurring, based on the HCFs. The HE component has a probability of 1.0 of occurring, since it must be present in order for the hazard to exist. It is therefore the IM component that drives the mishap probability, that is, when the IMs occur, the mishap occurs. The IMs are factors such as human err, component failures, timing errors, and the like. This concept is illustrated in Figure 2.9. The HCFs are the root cause of the hazard. The HCFs are in fact the hazard components that provide a threat and a mechanism for transitioning from a hazard to a mishap. The HE and the IM components of a hazard are the HCFs. These two HCFs establish the probability of the hazard becoming a mishap. The combined effect of the T/T and parts of the HE and IM components determine the severity of the hazard. For mishap severity the HE amount is usually of concern, and the IM factor that places the target in proximity of the HE. 2.7 RECOGNIZING HAZARDS Hazard identification is one of the major tasks of system safety, and hazard identification involves hazard recognition. Hazard recognition is the cognitive process of visualizing a hazard from an assorted package of design information. In order to recognize or identify hazards four things are necessary: 1. An understanding of hazard theory 2. A hazard analyses technique to provide a consistent and methodical process 3. An understanding of hazard recognition methods 4. An understanding of the system design and operation This chapter has discussed hazard theory in order that the safety analyst better understands the various aspects of a hazard, such as the hazard–mishap relationship, the three components of a hazard, and the types of hazard causal factors. Chapter 3 discusses the system safety hazard analysis types that are necessary to provide complete coverage for identifying various types of hazards. The rest of this book describes a number of different hazard analysis techniques that provide different levels of hazard analysis structure, rigor, and detail. This section concentrates on how to cognitively recognize a hazard. One of the annoying truisms of system safety is that it is usually easier to mitigate a hazard than it is to recognize or find the hazard in the first place. An analyst can fully understand hazard theory and have a hazard analysis tool available, yet there is still the vexing reality of actually recognizing a hazard. Hazard recognition is a key aspect of the hazard identification process, and therefore a key element of all hazard analyses. Hazards sometimes seem like ubiquitous and elusive little creatures that must be hunted and captured, where the hunt is akin to the recognition process. Another truism of system safety is that hazard recognition is somewhat more of an art than a science (this may be one reason why skilled system safety analysts are invaluable). However, there are some key recognition factors that can help the safety analyst visualize hazards, such as: 1. Utilizing the hazard triangle components a. HE Use hazardous element/component checklists b. IM Evaluate trigger events and causal factors c. T/T Evaluate possible threats and mishaps 2. Utilizing past knowledge from experience and lessons learned 3. Analyzing good design practices 4. Review of general design safety criteria, precepts, and principles 5. Review and analysis of generic level 2 hazard causal factors 6. Key failure state questions 7. Evaluation of top-level mishaps and safety critical functions The hazard triangle concept provides the best hazard recognition resource, by evaluating individually each of the three hazard component categories (HE, IM, and T/T) from a systems context. This means, for example, identifying and evaluating all of the HE components in the unique system design as the first step. Subsequently, all system IM sources are evaluated for hazards, then all T/T sources. When considering the HE component of the hazard triangle, focus on hazardous element checklists. The HE component involves items known to be a hazardous source, such as explosives, fuel, batteries, electricity, acceleration, chemicals, and the like. This means that generic hazard source checklists can be utilized to help recognize hazards within the unique system design. If a component in the system being analyzed is on one of the hazard source checklists, then this is a direct pointer to potential hazards that may be in the system. Speculate all of the possible ways that the hazardous element can be hazardous within the system design. There are many different types of hazard source checklists, such as those for energy sources, hazardous operations, chemicals, and so forth. Refer to Appendix C for some example checklists. Hazards can be recognized by focusing on known consequential hazard triggering mechanisms (the IM hazard component). For example, in the design of aircraft it is common knowledge that fuel ignition sources and fuel leakage sources are initiating mechanisms for fire/explosion hazards. Therefore, hazard recognition would benefit from detailed review of the design for ignition sources and leakage sources when fuel is involved. Component failure modes and human error are common triggering modes for hazards. Hazards can be recognized by focusing on known or preestablished undesired outcomes or mishaps (the target/threat hazard component). This means considering and evaluating known undesired outcomes within the system. For example, a missile system has certain undesired outcomes that are known right from the conceptual stage of system development. By following these undesired outcomes backward, certain hazards can be more readily recognized. In the design of missile systems, it is well accepted that inadvertent missile launch is an undesired mishap, and therefore any conditions contributing to this event would formulate a hazard, such as autoignition, switch failures, and human error. Another method for recognizing hazards is through the use of past knowledge from experience and lessons learned. Mishap and hazard information from a previously developed system that is similar in nature or design to the system currently under analysis will airport information desk in the hazard recognition process. For example, by reviewing the mishaps of an earlier spacecraft system, it might be discovered that the use of a particular seal design on a specific part of the spacecraft resulted in several mishaps. Seal design on this part of the spacecraft should then be recognized as a potential hazardous area requiring special focus in current new spacecraft design. Another method for recognizing hazards is through the review and analysis of good design practices. By reverse engineering good design practices found in various design documents and standards, hazardous design situations can be identified. For example, a good design practice for interrupting direct current (DC) circuits is to place the switch or circuit breaker on the power branch, rather than the ground branch of the circuit. This prevents inadvertent operation should a fault to ground occur. A hazard analysis should look for this and similar hazards in a new design. Another method for recognizing hazards is through the review of general design safety criteria, precepts, and principles. By considering the reasoning and logic behind specific safety criteria, precepts, and principles, some types of hazards can be more easily recognized. For example, there is a good safety reason for the following safety criteria: “Do not supply primary and redundant system circuits with power from the same bus or circuit.” This safety criterion is a clue that airborne integrated data system in recognizing hazards in systems involving redundancy. A hazard analysis should look for such hazards in a new design. Another method for recognizing hazards is through the review and analysis of generic level 2 hazard causal factors. Considering the various causal factor categories at a broad level can airport information desk in recognizing hazards. The broad causal factor categories include, hardware, software, human, interfaces, and the environment. For example, by evaluating all of the potential environments the system will operate in, or to which the system will be exposed, can assist in recognizing system hazards caused by environmental factors. Another method for recognizing hazards is through the use of key state questions. This is a method involving a set of clue questions that must be answered, each of which can trigger the recognition of a hazard. The key states are potential states or ways the subsystem could fail or operate incorrectly and thereby result in creating a hazard. For example, when evaluating each subsystem, answering the question “What happens when the subsystem fails to operate?” may lead to the recognition of a hazard. Table 2.2 contains a partial failure state checklist that provides some example key questions that should be asked when identifying hazards. Each system development state safety program should develop its specialized and unique list of key failure state questions. Table 2.3 demonstrates the hazard recognition process by listing the key considerations involved in the recognition of a hazard. The left-hand column of Table 2.3 states the identified hazard, while the right-hand column lists the key factors used to help recognize the hazard. It should be noted that it is very likely that additional hazards could probably be identified by using the listed hazard recognition keys, other than the single hazard shown in each of the above examples. Another method for recognizing hazards is through the evaluation of top-level mishaps (TLMs) and safety critical functions (SCFs). Looking for potential causal factors of already established TLMs is a way of identifying hazards. Also, a technique for identifying hazards is by carefully examining what might cause the inadvertent or premature occurrence of each of the elements in an SCF. 2.8 HAZARD DESCRIPTION Correctly describing the hazard is a very important aspect of hazard theory and analysis. The hazard description must contain all three components of the hazard control method (hazardous element, initiating mechanism, and target/threat). The hazard description should also be clear, concise, descriptive and to the point. If the hazard description is not properly worded, it will be difficult for anyone other than the original analyst to completely understand the hazard. If the hazard is not clearly understood, the concomitant risk of the hazard may not be correctly determined. This can lead to other undesirable consequences, such as spending too much time mitigating a low-risk hazard, when it was incorrectly thought to be high-risk hazard. Table 2.4 shows some good and poor example hazard descriptions. Note that the good examples contain all three elements of hazard: hazardous element, initiating mechanism, and target/threat. A hazard is potential condition built into the system design, which if it occurs, will result in an undesired event (i.e., mishap or accident). 2. Hazards are essentially the cause, or the precursor, for accidents and mishaps. 3. A hazard describes the special circumstances, conditions, and components that can result in accidents and mishaps. A hazard defines and predicts a potential future mishap. 4. A hazard consists of three required components, referred to as the hazard triangle: . Hazardous element (source) . Initiating mechanism (mechanism) . Threat/target of damage, injury or loss (outcome). 5. A hazard is a deterministic entity that has its own unique design, components, characteristics, and properties. 6. If any side of the hazard triangle is eliminated through design techniques, the hazard and its associated risk are also eliminated. 7. If a hazard cannot be eliminated, then its risk can be reduced (mitigated or controlled) by reducing the hazard’s probability of occurrence and/or the mishap severity through design techniques. 8. When a hazard is created, its outcome is almost always fixed and unchangeable. For this reason it is very difficult to reduce hazard severity, it is much easier to reduce the hazard probability (mishap risk probability). The risk severity of a hazard almost always remains the same after mitigation. 9. It is important that a hazard description is clear, concise, and complete; it must contain all three components of the hazard triangle (HE, IM, and T/T). 10. Hazards occur in a somewhat predictable manner, based on the necessary and sufficient conditions of their design. What is predictable (hazard) is also preventable or controllable (mishap). By focusing on hazards and hazard analysis, mishap risk can be eliminated or reduced. 11. When identifying hazards, the following factors help trigger the recognition of a hazard: . Evaluation of the hazard triangle components . Utilizing past knowledge from experience and lessons learned . Analyzing good design practices . Review of general design safety criteria, precepts, and principles . Review and analysis of generic level 2 hazard causal factors . Key state questions 12. Just as a picture is worth a thousand words, a good hazard description creates a picture that is invaluable in preventing a potential mishap.