Title: Hazard Analysis Techniques for System Safety– Chapter(s) 7 Author(s): Clifton A. Ericson, II Category: Hazard, Safety Tags: Hazard, Analysis, System, Safety System Hazard Analysis 7.1 INTRODUCTION The system hazard analysis (SHA) is an analysis methodology for evaluating risk and safety compliance at the system level, with a focus on interfaces and safety critical functions (SCFs). The system hazard analysis ensures that identified hazards are understood at the system level, that all causal factors are identified and mitigated, and that the overall system risk is known and accepted. system hazard analysis also provides a mechanism for identifying previously unforeseen interface hazards and evaluating causal factors in greater depth. The system hazard analysis is a detailed study of hazards resulting from system integration. This means evaluating all identified hazards and hazard causal factors across subsystem interfaces. The system hazard analysis expands upon the subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA) and may use techniques, such as fault tree analysis (FTA), to assess the impact of certain hazards at the system level. The system-level evaluation should include an analysis of all possible causal factors from sources such as design errors, hardware failures, human errors, software errors, and the like. Overall, the SHA: 1. Verifies system compliance with safety requirements contained in the system specifications and other applicable documents. 2. Identifies hazards associated with the subsystem interfaces and system functional faults. 3. Assesses the risk associated with the total system design, including software and, specifically, the subsystem interfaces. 4. Recommends actions necessary to eliminate identified hazards and/or control their associated risk to acceptable levels. 7.2 BACKGROUND This analysis technique falls under the system design hazard analysis type (SD-HAT). The analysis types are described in Chapter 3. There are no alternate names for this technique, although there are other safety analysis techniques that are sometimes used in place of the SHA, such as FTA. The system hazard analysis assesses the safety of the total system design by evaluating the integrated system. The primary emphasis of the SHA, including hardware, software, and human systems integration (HSI), is to verify that the product is in compliance with the specified and derived system safety requirements (SSRs) at the system level. This includes compliance with acceptable mishap risk levels. The system hazard analysis examines the entire system as a whole by integrating the essential outputs from the SSHAs. Emphasis is placed on the interactions and the interfaces of all the subsystems as they operate together. The system hazard analysis evaluates subsystem interrelationships for the following: 1. Compliance with specified safety design criteria 2. Possible independent, dependent, and simultaneous hazardous events, including system failures, failures of safety devices, and system interactions that could create a hazard or result in an increase in mishap risk 3. Degradation in the safety of a subsystem or the total system from normal operation of another subsystem 4. Design changes that affect subsystems 5. Effects of human errors 6. Degradation in the safety of the total system from commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware or software 7. Assurance that SCFs are adequately safe from a total system viewpoint and that all interface and common cause failure (CCF) considerations have been evaluated. The system hazard analysis can be applied to any system; it is applied during and after detailed design to identify and resolve subsystem interface problems. The system hazard analysis technique, when applied to a given system by experienced safety personnel, is thorough in evaluating system-level hazards and causal factors and ensuring safe system integration. The success of the system hazard analysis is highly dependent on the completion of other system safety analyses, such as the preliminary hazard analysis (PHA), SSHA, safety requirements/criteria analysis (SRCA), and operations and support hazard analysis (O&SHA). A basic understanding of hazard analysis theory is essential, as well as knowledge of system safety concepts. Experience with and/or a good working knowledge of the particular type of system and subsystems is necessary in order to identify and analyze all hazards. The system hazard analysis methodology is uncomplicated and easily learned. Standard system hazard analysis forms and instructions have been developed and are included in this chapter. The overall purpose of the system hazard analysis is to ensure safety at the integrated system level. The preferred approach utilizes the system hazard analysis worksheet presented in this chapter. Particular interface concerns and/or top-level mishaps (TLMs) may require a separate analysis, such as FTA, to identify all of the unique details and causal factors of the TLMs. High-consequence TLMs may require a common cause failure analysis (CCFA) to ensure that all design redundancy is truly independent and effective. Use of this technique is recommended for identification of system-level interface hazards. There is no alternative hazard analysis technique for the SHA. Other hazard analysis techniques, such as the fault tree analysis or CCFA, may be used to supplement the system hazard analysis but are not recommended as a replacement for the SHA. 7.3 HISTORY The system hazard analysis technique was established very early in the history of the system safety discipline. It was formally instituted and promulgated by the developers of MIL-STD-882. It was developed to ensure safety at the integrated system level. 7.4 THEORY The intent of system hazard analysis is to ensure complete system-level hazard mitigation and demonstrate safety compliance with system-level safety requirements. Two key concepts involved with an system hazard analysis are safety-critical function and safety-critical function thread. Figure 7.1 shows an overview of the basic system hazard analysis process and summarizes the important relationships involved. The system hazard analysis provides a mechanism to identify all causal factors of hazard and their mitigation. It also provides the means to evaluate all subsystem interfaces for hazard causal factors. System design, design criteria, and previously identified hazards are starting considerations in the SHA. Hazard action records (HARs) from the hazard tracking system (HTS) contain the previously identified hazards, causal factors, and actions resulting from the PHA, SSHA, O&SHA, and HHA. Through a review of the hazards with possible interface concerns, the system hazard analysis identifies interface-related hazards that were previously undiscovered or interface causal factors to existing hazards. As part of the SHA, all identified hazards are combined under TLMs. The system hazard analysis then evaluates each top-level mishap to determine if all causal factors are identified and adequately mitigated to an acceptable level of system risk. A review of the TLMs in the system hazard analysis will indicate if additional in-depth analysis of any sort is necessary, such as for a safety critical hazard or an interface concern. 7.5 METHODOLOGY The system hazard analysis is initiated when detailed design data is available. The system hazard analysis is usually initiated when the subsystem hazard analysis is essentially complete and when the operating & support hazard analysis has been initiated but not necessarily completed. operating & support hazard analysis information is utilized as it is developed. An overview of the system hazard analysis methodology is shown in Figure 7.2. The system hazard analysis process involves reviewing and utilizing the results of previously ident-ified hazards. This review is primarily focused on the evaluation of subsystem inter-faces for potential hazards not yet identified. System and subsystem design safety requirements are utilized by the system hazard analysis to evaluate system compliance. Subsystem interface information, primarily from the subsystem hazard analysis and interface specifications, is also utilized by the system hazard analysis to assist in the identification of interface-related hazards. The TLMs must be established during the SHA, if not previously done during the preliminary hazard analysis or SSHA. This is accomplished by reviewing all identified hazards and their resulting mishap consequences. Design requirements and guideline documents help establish TLMs, such as the “inadvertent missile launch” TLM. Table 7.1 lists and describes the basic steps in the system hazard analysis process. Most hazards will have most likely already been identified by the time the PHL, PHA, SSHA, and operating & support hazard analysis are complete. Since the system hazard analysis focuses on interface hazards and causal factors, the system hazard analysis sometimes does not result in a large quantity of hazards. 7.6 WORKSHEET It is desirable to perform the system hazard analysis analysis using a worksheet. The worksheet will help to add rigor to the analysis, record the process and data, and help support justification for the identified hazards and safety recommendations. The format of the analysis worksheet is not critical and typically columnar-type worksheets are utilized. As a minimum, the following basic information should be obtained from the system hazard analysis analysis worksheet: 1. Interface or system hazards 2. Hazard causal factors 3. Hazard risk 4. Information to determine if further causal factor analysis is necessary for a particular hazard The recommended system hazard analysis columnar-type worksheet is shown in Figure 7.3. The following instructions describe the information required under each column entry of the system hazard analysis worksheet: 1. System This entry identifies the system under analysis. 2. Analyst: This entry identifies the name of the system hazard analysis analyst. 3. Date: This entry identifies the date of the system hazard analysis analysis. 4. Hazard Number This column identifies the number assigned to the identified hazard in the system hazard analysis (e.g., SHA-1, SHA-2, etc.). This is for future reference to the particular hazard source and may be used, for example, in the hazard action record (HAR) and the hazard tracking system (HTS). 5. TLM/SCF This column identifies the top-level mishap or the safety critical function that is being investigated for possible interface hazards. 6. Hazard This column identifies the specific hazard being postulated. (Remember to document all hazard considerations even if they are proven to be nonhazardous.) 7. Causes This column identifies conditions, events, or faults that could cause the hazard to exist and the events that can trigger the hazardous elements to become mishaps or accidents. 8. Effects This column identifies the effects and consequences of the hazard, should it occur. Generally, the worst-case result is the stated effect. 9. Initial Mishap Risk Index (IMRI) This column provides a qualitative measure of mishap risk for the potential effect of the identified hazard, given that no mitigation techniques are applied to it. Risk measures are a combination of mishap severity and probability and the recommended values from MIL-STD-882, as shown below. Severity Probability I. Catastrophic II. Critical III. Marginal IV. Negligible Probability A. Frequent B. Probable C. Occasional D. Remote E. Improbable 10. Recommended Action This column establishes recommended preventive measures to eliminate or mitigate the identified hazards. Recommendations generally take the form of guideline safety requirements from existing sources or a proposed mitigation method that is eventually translated into a newly derived system safety requirements intended to mitigate the hazard. SSRs are generated after coordination with the design and requirements organizations. Hazard mitigation methods should follow the preferred order of precedence established in MIL-STD-882 for invoking or developing safety requirements, which are shown below. Order of Precedence 1. Eliminate hazards through design selection 2. Incorporate safety devices 3. Provide warning devices 4. Develop procedures and training 11. Recommended Action This column may also include actions such as further and more detailed analysis using other techniques to determine if and where other mitigation is required. 12. Final Mishap Risk Index (FMRI) This column provides a qualitative measure of mishap risk for the potential effect of the identified hazard, given that mitigation techniques and safety requirements are applied to the hazard. The same risk matrix table used to evaluate column 9 is also used here. The implementation of recommended mitigation measures should be verified and validated prior to accepting the final mishap residual risk. 13. Status This column states the current status of the hazard as being either open or closed. 7.7 GUIDELINES The following are some basic guidelines that should be followed when completing the system hazard analysis worksheet: 1. The system hazard analysis identifies hazards caused by subsystem interface factors, environmental factors, or common cause factors. 2. The system hazard analysis should not be a continuation of subsystem hazards (e.g., personnel contacts high voltage in unit B) because these types of hazards have been ade-quately treated by the SSHA. Do not place all subsystem hazard analysis hazards into the SHA. 3. Start the system hazard analysis by considering TLMs and SCFs for interface hazards. These are the significant safety areas that can provide the sources for identifying system interface hazards. 4. For each SCF, determine the hazardous undesired event(s) for that function. For example, the safety critical function “missile launch function” creates an undesired event of “inadvertent launch,” which may consist of several different interface hazards. 5. For each SC function create a safety critical function thread. This thread consists of the items necessary for safe operation of the SCF. 6. Evaluate and analyze the items in each safety critical function thread for interface causal factors contributing to the undesired event for the thread. 7. For TLMs that do not directly relate to a SCF, it may be necessary to establish a pseudo-SCF for them. The pseudo-SCF thread than can be evaluated in a similar manner. 8. The subsystem hazard analysis does not evaluate functions unless the function resides entirely within the subsystem. Functions tend to cross subsystem boundaries and are, therefore, evaluated in the SHA. 9. Perform supporting analyses as determined necessary (e.g., FTA, bent pin analysis, CCFA). The SCFs and TLMs emphasize safety critical areas that should receive special analysis attention. In many instances there is a direct relationship between SCFs and TLMs, as some TLMs are the inverse of an SCF. This is the reason for the SCF/TLM column in the system hazard analysis worksheet. Figure 7.4 depicts an safety critical function thread for missile launch processing under normal expected conditions. Figure 7.5 shows how this thread can be used to understand the hazard causal factors within a thread when evaluating the undesired event for that thread. Figure 7.6 depicts how a safety critical function thread can be utilized in the SHA. 7.8 EXAMPLE In order to demonstrate the system hazard analysis methodology, the same hypothetical small missile system from Chapters 4 and 5 will be used. The basic system design information provided is shown in Figure 7.7. Figure 7.8 lists the major system components, functions, phases, and energy sources that should be considered for the SSHA. The major segments of the system are the missile and the weapon control system (WCS). Figure 7.9 shows the basic planned operational phases for the missile system. Table 7.2 contains the list of TLMs resulting from previous hazard analyses. These are the TLMs that will be used in the system hazard analysis worksheets. Tables 7.3 and 7.4 contain the system hazard analysis worksheets for the entire Ace missile weapon system. Since top-level mishap 1 and top-level mishap 2 are safety critical mishaps, it has been recommended in SHA-1 and SHA-2 that an fault tree analysis is performed on these TLMs to ensure all causal factors have been identified and that no interface problems or common cause faults have been overlooked. Figure 7.10 is a functional block diagram (FBD) for the missile warhead initiation function. This functional block diagram shows what tasks and functions must transpire in order for missile initiation to occur. As part of the SHA, FTAs would be performed on top-level mishap 1 and top-level mishap 2 as rec-ommended in the system hazard analysis worksheets. To continue this example, a top-level fault tree (FT) will be constructed for top-level mishap 2, “inadvertent warhead initiation.” In performing the FTA, the safety analyst will use the FBD, detailed schematics, software code, and the like. Figure 7.11 contains the top-level fault tree analysis for top-level mishap 2. The fault tree analysis cannot be completed in this example because not enough design information has been provided. The top-level fault tree analysis is shown here to demonstrate the system hazard analysis process. A completed fault tree analysis may uncover common cause failures that bypass the designed-in redundancy. Further, more detailed information on fault tree analysis can be found in Chapter 11. The following results should be noted from the system hazard analysis of the Ace Missile System: 1. All of the identified hazards fall under one of the 10 top-level mishap categories. 2. The recommended action is not always in the form of a direct SSR. Additional research may be necessary to convert the recommendation into a meaningful design requirement. 3. The system hazard analysis often recommends further detailed analysis of a particular hazard, TLM, or safety concern. In this case, the system hazard analysis recommended that FTAs be performed on top-level mishap 1 and top-level mishap 2. When complete, these FTAs should show that these undesired events are within acceptable levels of probability of occurrence and that no critical common cause faults exist. If the FTAs do not show acceptable risk, then new interface hazard causal factors may have been identified, which have not been mitigated. 7.9 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES The following are the advantages of the system hazard analysis technique. The SHA: 1. Identifies system interface-type hazards. 2. Consolidates hazards to ensure that all causal factors are thoroughly investigated and mitigated. 3. Identifies critical system-level hazards that must be evaluated in more detail through the use of other analysis techniques. 4. Provides the basis for making an assessment of overall system risk. There are no disadvantages to the system hazard analysis technique. COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID When first learning how to perform an SHA, it is commonplace to commit some typical mistakes. The following is a list of errors often encountered during the conduct of an SHA: 1. The causal factors for a hazard are not thoroughly investigated. 2. The mishap risk index (MRI) risk severity level does not appropriately support the identified hazardous effects. 3. Hazards are closed prematurely without complete causal factor analysis and test verification. 4. Failure to consider common cause events and dependent events. 5. A series of FTAs are used in place of the system hazard analysis worksheets. The fault tree analysis should be a supporting analysis only. 7.11 SUMMARY This chapter discussed the system hazard analysis technique. The following are basic principles that help summarize the discussion in this chapter: 1. The primary purpose of the system hazard analysis is to ensure safety of the total system, which involves ensuring that system risk is acceptable. The system hazard analysis assesses system compliance with safety requirements and criteria, through traceability of hazards and verification of SSRs. 2. The system hazard analysis identifies system hazards overlooked by other analyses, particularly those types of hazards perpetuated through the subsystem interface incompatibilities. 3. The SCFs and safety-critical TLMs may require more detailed analysis by other techniques (e.g., FTA, CCFA, etc.) to ensure that all causal factors are identified and mitigated. 4. The use of worksheets provides structure and rigor to the system hazard analysis process.