Hazard analyses are performed to identify hazards, hazard effects, and hazard causal factors. Hazard analyses are used to determine system risk and thereby ascertain the significance of hazards so that safety design measures can be established to eliminate or mitigate the hazard. Analyses are performed to systematically examine the system, subsystem, facility, components, software, personnel, and their interrelationships. There are two categories of hazard analyses: types and techniques. Hazard analysis type defines an analysis category (e.g., detailed design analysis), and technique defines a unique analysis methodology (e.g., fault tree analysis). The type establishes analysis timing, depth of detail, and system coverage. The technique refers to a specific and unique analysis methodology that provides specific results. System safety is built upon seven basic types, while there are well over 100 different techniques available. 1 In general, there are several different techniques available for achieving each of the various types. The overarching distinctions between type and technique are summarized in Table 3.1. Hazard analysis type describes the scope, coverage, detail, and life-cycle phase timing of the particular hazard analysis. Each type of analysis is intended to provide a time- or phase-dependent analysis that readily identifies hazards for a particular design phase in the system development life cycle. Since more detailed design and operation information is available as the development program progresses, so in turn more detailed information is available for a particular type of hazard analysis. The depth of detail for the analysis type increases as the level of design detail progresses. Each of these analysis types define a point in time when the analysis should begin, the level of detail of the analysis, the type of information available, and the analysis output. The goals of each analysis type can be achieved by various analysis techniques. The analyst needs to carefully select the appropriate techniques to achieve the goals of each of the analysis types. There are seven hazard analysis types in the system safety discipline: 1. Conceptual design hazard analysis type (CD-HAT) 2. Preliminary design hazard analysis type (PD-HAT) 3. Detailed design hazard analysis type (DD-HAT) 4. System design hazard analysis type (SD-HAT) 5. Operations design hazard analysis type (OD-HAT) 6. Health design hazard analysis type (HD-HAT) 7. Requirements design hazard analysis type (RD-HAT) An important principle about hazard analysis is that one particular hazard analysis type does not necessarily identify all the hazards within a system; identification of hazards may take more than one analysis type (hence the seven types). A corollary to this principle is that one particular hazard analysis type does not necessarily identify all of the hazard causal factors; more than one analysis type may be required. After performing all seven of the hazard analysis types, all hazards and causal factors should have been identified; however, additional hazards may be discovered during the test program. Figure 3.1 conveys the filter concept behind the seven hazard analysis types. In this concept, each hazard analysis type acts like a filter that identifies certain types of hazards. Each successive filter serves to identify hazards missed by the previous filter. The thick dark arrows at the top of the filter signify hazards existing in the system design. When all of the hazard analysis types have been applied, the only known hazards remaining have been reduced to an acceptable level of risk, denoted by the smaller thin arrows. Use of all seven hazards analysis types is critical in identifying and mitigating all hazards and reducing system residual risk. Each hazard analysis type serves a unique function or purpose. For a best practice system safety program (SSP), it is recommended that all seven of these hazard analysis types be applied; however, tailoring is permissible. If tailoring is utilized, the specifics should be spelled out in the system safety management plan (SSMP) and/or the system safety program plan (SSPP). Figure 3.2 depicts the relationship between hazard types and techniques. In this relationship, the seven hazard analysis types form the central focus for state safety program hazard analysis. There are many different analysis techniques to select from when performing the analysis types, and there are many different factors that must go into the hazard analysis, such as the system life-cycle stages of concept, design, test, manufacture, operation, and disposal. The system modes, phases, and functions must be considered. The system hardware, software, firmware, human interfaces, and environmental aspects must also be considered. Some textbooks refer to the seven types as preliminary hazard list (PHL), pre-liminary hazard analysis (PHA), subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA), system hazard analysis (SHA), operating and support hazard analysis (O&SHA), health hazard analysis (HHA), and safety requirement/criteria analysis (SRCA). These names are, however, the same names as the basic hazard analysis techniques established by MIL-STD-882, versions A, B, and C. The concept of analysis types is a good concept, but having types and techniques with the same name is somewhat confusing. The approach recommended in this book ensures there are no common names between Conceptual Design Hazard Analysis Type (CD-HAT) The CD-HAT is a high-level (low level of detail) form of hazard analysis that identifies top-level hazards that can be recognized during the conceptual design phase. The CD-HAT is the first analysis type performed and is the starting point for all subsequent hazard analyses. The CD-HAT provides a basis for initially estimating the overall state safety program effort. The purpose of the CD-HAT is to compile a list of hazards very early in the pro-duct or system development life cycle to identify potentially hazardous areas. These hazardous areas identify where management should place design safety emphasis. The CD-HAT searches for hazards that may be inherent in the design or operational concept. It is a brainstorming, “what-if” analysis. A hazard list is generated from the brainstorming session, or sessions, where everything conceivable is considered and documented. The topics include review of safety experience on similar systems, hazard checklists, mishap/incident hazard tracking logs, safety lessons learned, and so forth to identify possible hazards. The key to a successful state safety program is involvement early in the development program, beginning during conceptual design. The CD-HAT is started when the concept definition for a product or system begins and carries into the preliminary design phase. It is performed early in the program life cycle in order to influence design concepts and decisions for safety as early as possible. The CD-HAT is the first analysis type performed and precedes the PD-HAT since it provides input for the PD-HAT. If the CD-HAT is not performed during concept definition, it should be per-formed prior to, and as part of, any PD-HAT effort since it is an essential precursor to the PD-HAT. Once the initial CD-HAT is completed and documented, it is rarely updated as additional hazard identification analysis is achieved via the PD-HAT. In general, the CD-HAT supports the system design review (SDR), and CD-HAT effort ends at the start of the PD-HAT. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive CD-HAT: 1. Will be applied during the design concept phase of system development. 2. Will be a high-level analysis (low level of detail) based on conceptual design information. 3. Will identify system hazards and potential mishaps. 4. Will consider hazards during system test, manufacture, operation, maintenance, and disposal. 5. Will consider system hardware, software, firmware, human interfaces, and environmental aspects. Input information for the CD-HAT analysis type includes everything that is avail-able during conceptual design. Experience has shown that generally the CD-HAT can be performed utilizing the following types of information: 1. Design concept 2. Statement of work (SOW), specification, drawings (if available) 3. Preliminary (conceptual) indentured equipment list 4. Preliminary (conceptual) functions list 5. Energy sources in the system 6. Hazard checklists (generic) 7. Lessons learned (similar systems) The primary purpose of the CD-HAT is to generate a list of system-level hazards, which can be used as an initial risk assessment and as the starting point for the sub-sequent hazard analysis types. As such, the following information is typically output from the CD-HAT analysis: 1. System hazards 2. Top-level mishaps (TLMs) 3. Information to support the PD-HAT analysis 3.2.2 Preliminary Design Hazard Analysis Type (PD-HAT) The PD-HAT is a preliminary level form of analysis that does not go into extensive detail; it is preliminary in nature. The PD-HAT is performed to identify system-level hazards and to obtain an initial risk assessment of a system design. It is performed early, during the preliminary design phase, in order to affect design decisions as early as possible to avoid future costly design changes. The PD-HAT is the basic hazard analysis that establishes the framework for all of the follow-on hazard analyses. It provides a preliminary safety engineering evaluation of the design in terms of potential hazards, causal factors, and mishap risk. The intent of the PD-HAT is to recognize the hazardous system states and to begin the process of controlling hazards identified by the CD-HAT. As the design progresses in detail, more detailed analyses are performed to facilitate the elimination or mitigation of all hazards. Identification of safety critical functions (SCFs) and TLMs is a key element of the PD-HAT. The specific definition of what constitutes classification as safety critical (SC) is generally program specific, as different types of systems may warrant different definitions based on the hazardous nature of the system. The PD-HAT should be started during the design conceptual stage (after the CD-HAT) and continued through preliminary design. If the PD-HAT is not initiated during conceptual design, it should be initiated with the start of preliminary design. It is important that safety considerations identified in the PD-HAT are included in trade studies and design alternatives as early as possible in the design process. Work on the PD-HAT usually concludes when the detailed design hazard analysis type is initiated. In general, the PD-HAT supports all preliminary design reviews. The PD-HAT may also be used on an existing operational system for the initial examination of proposed design changes to the system. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive PD-HAT: 1. Will be applied during the design concept and preliminary design phases of system development. 2. Will focus on all system hazards resulting from the preliminary design concept and component selection. 3. Will be a high- to medium-level analysis (low to medium level of detail) that is based on preliminary design information. 4. Will identify hazards, potential mishaps, causal factors, risk, and SCFs. It will identify applicable safety guidelines, requirements, principles, and precepts to mitigate hazards. It will also provide recommendations to mitigate hazards. 5. Will consider hazards during system test, manufacture, operation, maintenance, and disposal. 6. Will consider system hardware, software, firmware, human interfaces, and environmental aspects. Input information for the PD-HAT consists of the preliminary design information that is available during the preliminary design development phase. Typically the following types of information are available and utilized in the PD-HAT: 1. Results of the CD-HAT analysis 2. statement of work 3. System specification 4. Design drawings and sketches 5. Preliminary indentured equipment list 6. Functional flow diagrams of activities, functions, and operations 7. Concepts for operation, test, manufacturing, storage, repair, and transportation 8. Energy sources 9. Hazard checklists (generic) 10. Lessons learned from experiences of similar previous programs or activities 11. Failure modes review 12. Safety guidelines and requirements from standards and manuals The primary purpose of the PD-HAT is to perform a formal analysis for identifying system-level hazards and evaluating the associated risk levels. As such, the following information is typically output from the PD-HAT: 1. System-level hazards 2. Hazard effects and mishaps 3. Hazard causal factors (to subsystem identification) 4. SCFs 5. TLMs 6. Safety design criteria, principles, and precepts for design guidance in hazard mitigation 7. Risk assessment (before and after design safety features for hazard mitigation) 8. Safety recommendations for eliminating or mitigating the hazards 9. Information to support DD-HAT, SD-HAT, and OD-HAT analyses 3.2.3 Detailed Design Hazard Analysis Type (DD-HAT) The detailed design hazard analysis type is a detailed form of analysis, performed to further evaluate hazards from the preliminary hazard analysis with new detailed design information. The detailed design hazard analysis type also evaluates the functional relationships of components and equipment comprising each sub-system. The analysis will help identify all components and equipment whose performance degradation or functional failure could result in hazardous conditions. Of particular concern is the identification of single-point failures (SPFs). The detailed design hazard analysis type is also used to identify new hazards that can be recognized from the detailed design information that is available and to identify the hazard causal factors of specific subsystems and their associated risk levels. The detailed design hazard analysis type is an analysis of the detailed design and can therefore run from the start of detailed design through completion of final manufacturing drawings. Once the initial detailed design hazard analysis type is completed and documented, it is not generally updated and enhanced, except for the evaluation of design changes. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive detailed design hazard analysis type analysis: 1. Will be a detailed analysis at the subsystem and component level. 2. Will be applied during the detailed design of the system. 3. Will identify hazards, resulting mishaps, causal factors, risk, and SCFs. It will also identify applicable safety recommendations for hazard mitigation. 4. Will consider hazards during system test, manufacture, operation, maintenance, and disposal. 5. Will consider system hardware, software, firmware, human interfaces, and environmental aspects. Input information for the detailed design hazard analysis type analysis consists of all detailed design data. Typically the following types of information are available and utilized in the DD-HAT: 1. PD-HAT analysis results 2. System description (design and functions) 3. Detailed design information (drawings, schematics, etc.) 4. Indentured equipment list 5. Functional block diagrams 6. Hazard checklists The primary purpose of the detailed design hazard analysis type is to evaluate the detailed design for hazards and hazard causal factors and the associated subsystem risk levels. As such, the following information is typical output from the DD-HAT: 1. Subsystem hazards 2. Detailed causal factors 3. Risk assessment 4. Safety critical subsystem interfaces 5. Safety design recommendations to mitigate hazards 6. Special detailed analyses of specific hazards using special analysis techniques such as fault tree analysis (FTA) 7. Information to support the RD-HAT and system design hazard analysis type analyses 3.2.4 System Design Hazard Analysis Type (SD-HAT) The system design hazard analysis type assesses the total system design safety by evaluating the integrated system design. The primary emphasis of the SD-HAT, inclusive of both hardware and software, is to verify that the product is in compliance with the specified safety requirements at the system level. This includes compliance with acceptable mishap risk levels. The system design hazard analysis type examines the entire system as a whole by integrating the essential outputs from the detailed design hazard analysis type analyses. Emphasis is placed on the interactions and the interfaces of all the subsystems as they operate together. he system design hazard analysis type provides determination of system risks in terms of hazard severity and hazard probability. System hazards are evaluated to identify all causal factors, including hardware, software, firmware, and human interaction. The causal factors may involve many interrelated fault events from many different subsystems. Thus, the system design hazard analysis type evaluates all the subsystem interfaces and interrelationships for each system hazard. The system design hazard analysis type is system oriented, and therefore it usually begins during preliminary design and is complete by the end of final design, except for closure of all hazards. The system design hazard analysis type is finalized at completion of the test program when all hazards have been tested for closure. system design hazard analysis type documentation generally supports safety decisions for commencement of operational evaluations. The system design hazard analysis type should be updated as a result of any system design changes, including software and firm-ware design changes to ensure that the design change does not adversely affect system mishap risk. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive system design hazard analysis type analysis: 1. Will be applied primarily during the detailed design phase of system development; it can be initiated during preliminary design. 2. Is a detailed level of analysis that provides focus from an integrated system viewpoint. 3. Will be based on detailed and final design information. 4. Will identify new hazards associated with the subsystem interfaces. 5. Will consider hazards during system test, manufacture, operation, maintenance, and disposal. 6. Will consider system hardware, software, firmware, human interfaces, and environmental aspects. Typically the following types of information are available and utilized in the system design hazard analysis type analysis: 1. PD-HAT, DD-HAT, RD-HAT, OD-HAT, and other detailed hazard analyses 2. System design requirements 3. System description (design and functions) 4. Equipment and function indenture lists 5. System interface specifications 6. Test data The primary purpose of the system design hazard analysis type analysis is to perform a formal analysis for identifying system-level hazards and evaluating the associated risk levels. As such, the following information is typically output from the SD-HAT: 1. System interface hazards 2. System hazard causal factors (hardware, software, firmware, human inter- action, and environmental) 3. Assessment of system risk 4. Special detailed analyses of specific hazards using special analysis techniques such as fault tree analysis 5. Information to support the safety assessment report (SAR) 3.2.5 Operations Design Hazard Analysis Type (OD-HAT) The OD-HAT analysis evaluates the operations and support functions involved with the system. These functions include use, test, maintenance, training, storage, handling, transportation, and demilitarization or disposal. The OD-HAT analysis identifies operational hazards that can be eliminated or mitigated through design features and through modified operational procedures when necessary. The OD-HAT analysis considers human limitations and potential human errors (human factors). The human is considered an element of the total system, receiving inputs and initiating outputs. The OD-HAT analysis is performed when operations information becomes avail-able and should start early enough to provide inputs to the design. The OD-HAT should be completed prior to the conduct of any operating and support functions. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive OD-HAT analysis: 1. Will be performed during the detailed design phases of system development when the operating and support procedures are being written. 2. Will focus on hazards occurring during operations and support. 3. Will provide an integrated assessment of the system design, related equipment, facilities, operational tasks, and human factors. 4. Will be a detailed analysis based on final design information. 5. Will identify hazards, potential mishaps, causal factors, risk and safety critical factors, applicable safety requirements, and hazard mitigation recommendations. 6. Will consider hazards during system use, test, maintenance, training, storage, handling, transportation, and demilitarization or disposal. The following types of information are utilized in the OD-HAT: 1. PD-HAT, DD-HAT, SD-HAT, and any other applicable hazard analyses 2. Engineering descriptions/drawings of the system, support equipment, and facilities 3. Available procedures and operating manuals 4. Operational requirements, constraints, and required personnel capabilities 5. Human factors engineering data and reports 6. Lessons learned, including human factors 7. Operational sequence diagrams The OD-HAT focus is on operating and support tasks and procedures. The following information is typically available from the OD-HAT: 1. Task-oriented hazards (caused by design, software, human, timing, etc.) 2. Hazard mishap effect 3. Hazard causal factors (including human factors) 4. Risk assessment 5. Hazard mitigation recommendations and derived design safety requirements 6. Derived procedural safety requirements 7. Cautions and warnings for procedures and manuals 8. Input information to support the system design hazard analysis type analysis 3.2.6 Human Design Hazard Analysis Type (HD-HAT) The HD-HAT analysis is intended to systematically identify and evaluate human health hazards, evaluate proposed hazardous materials, and propose measures to eliminate or control these hazards through engineering design changes or protective measures to reduce the risk to an acceptable level. The HD-HAT assesses design safety by evaluating the human health aspects involved with the system. These aspects include manufacture, use, test, maintenance, training, storage, handling, transportation, and demilitarization or disposal. The HD-HAT concentrates on human health hazards. The HD-HAT is started during preliminary design and continues to be performed as more information becomes available. The HD-HAT should be completed and system risk known prior to the conduct of any of the manufacturing, test, or operational phases. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive HD-HAT analysis: 1. Will be applied during the preliminary and detailed design phases of system development. 2. Will focus on the human environment within the system. 3. Will be a detailed analysis based on system design and operational tasks affecting the human environment. 4. Will identify hazards, potential mishaps, causal factors, risk and safety critical factors, and applicable safety requirements. 5. Will consider human health hazards during system test, manufacture, operation, maintenance, and demilitarization or disposal. Consideration should include, but is not limited to, the following: a. Materials hazardous to human health (e.g., material safety data sheets) b. Chemical hazards c. Radiological hazards d. Biological hazards e. Ergonomic hazards f. Physical hazards Typically the following types of information are available and utilized in the HD-HAT analysis: 1. CD-HAT, PD-HAT, DD-HAT, SD-HAT, OD-HAT, and any other applicable detailed hazard analyses 2. Materials and compounds used in the system production and operation 3. Material safety data sheets 4. System operational tasks and procedures, including maintenance procedures 5. System design The following information is typically available from the HD-HAT analysis: 1. Human health hazards 2. Hazard mishap effects 3. Hazard causal factors 4. Risk assessment 5. Derived design safety requirements 6. Derived procedural safety requirements (including cautions, warnings, and personal protective equipment) 7. Input information for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and environmental evaluations 8. Information to support the OD-HAT and system design hazard analysis type analyses 3.2.7 Requirements Design Hazard Analysis Type (RD-HAT) The RD-HAT is a form of analysis that verifies and validates the design safety requirements and ensures that no safety gaps exist in the requirements. The RD-HAT applies to hardware, software, firmware, and test requirements. Since the RD-HAT is an evaluation of design and test safety requirements, it is performed during the design and test stages of the development program. The RD-HAT can run from mid-preliminary design through the end of testing. Safety design requirements are generated from three sources: (1) the system specification, (2) generic requirements from similar systems, subsystems, and processes, and (3) requirements derived from recommendations to mitigate identified system-unique hazards. The intent of the RD-HAT is to ensure that all of the appropriate safety requirements are included within the design requirements and that they are verified and validated through testing, analysis, or inspection. Applicable generic system safety design requirements are obtained from such sources as federal, military, national, and industry regulations, codes, standards, specifications, guidelines, and other related documents for the system under development. The RD-HAT supports closure of identified hazards. Safety requirements levied against the design to mitigate identified hazards must be verified and validated before a hazard in the hazard tracking system can be closed. The RD-HAT provides a means of traceability for all safety requirements, verifying their implementation and validating their success. The RD-HAT is an evolving analysis that is performed over a period of time, where it is continually updated and enhanced as more design and test information becomes available. The RD-HAT is typically performed in conjunction with the PD-HAT, DD-HAT, SD-HAT, and OD-HAT analyses. The RD-HAT should be complete at the end of testing. The following are the basic requirements of a comprehensive RD-HAT analysis: 1. Will be applied from the preliminary design phases through testing of the system. 2. Will focus on safety requirements intended to eliminate and/or mitigate identified hazards. 3. Will be a detailed analysis based on detailed design requirements and design information. 4. Will ensure that all identified hazards have suitable safety requirements to eliminate and/or mitigate the hazards. 5. Will ensure that all safety requirements are verified and validated through analysis, testing, or inspection. Typically the following types of information are available and utilized in the RD-HAT: 1. Hazards without mitigating safety requirements 2. Design safety requirements (hardware, software, firmware) 3. Test requirements 4. Test results 5. Unverified safety requirements The primary purposes of the RD-HAT are to establish traceability of safety requirements and to assist in the closure of mitigated hazards. The following information is typically output from the RD-HAT: 1. Traceability matrix of all safety design requirements to identified hazards 2. Traceability matrix of all safety design requirements to test requirements and test results 3. Identification of new safety design requirements and tests necessary to cover gaps discovered by items 1 and 2 above 4. Data supporting closure of hazards Figure 3.3 contains a consolidated view of the time period over which the hazard analysis types are typically performed. This schedule shows the most typical timing that has been found practical through many years of trial and error. The system development phases shown are from the standard engineering development life-cycle model. The time period for performing the hazard analysis is not rigidly fixed but is dependent on many variables, such as size of the system and project, safety critical-ity of the system, personal experience, common sense, and so forth. The time period is shown as a bar because the analysis can be performed at any time during the period shown. Specifying the time period for a hazard analysis is part of the safety program tailoring process and should be documented in the SSPP. Each of the hazard analysis types has a functional time period when it is most effectively applied to achieve the desired intent and goals. Note how each of the hazard analysis types correlates very closely to its associated development phase. Also, note that some of the analysis types should be per-formed in a later development phase if that phase was not specifically covered by the original analysis. 3.4 INTERRELATIONSHIP OF HAZARD ANALYSIS TYPES Figure 3.4 shows the relative relationship of each of the hazard analysis types and their interdependencies. This figure shows how the output of one analysis type can provide input data for another analysis type. 3.5 HAZARD ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES Hazard analysis technique defines a unique analysis methodology (e.g., fault tree analysis). The technique refers to a specific and unique analysis methodology that is performed following a specific set of rules and provides specific results. As previously mentioned, there are over 100 different hazard analysis techniques in existence, and the number continues to slowly grow. Many of the techniques are minor variations of other techniques. And, many of the techniques are not widely practiced. This book presents 22 of the most commonly used techniques by system safety practitioners. Table 3.2 lists the hazard analysis techniques covered in this book, along with the corresponding chapter number describing the technique. Each of these hazard analysis techniques is important enough to warrant an individual chapter devoted to describing just that technique. The system safety engineer/analyst should be thoroughly familiar with each of the analysis techniques presented in this book. They form the basic building blocks for performing hazard and safety analysis on any type of system. Hazard analysis techniques can have many different inherent attributes, which makes their utility different. The appropriate technique to use can often be deter-mined from the inherent attributes of the technique. Table 3.3 contains a list of the most significant attributes for a hazard analysis methodology. Table 3.4 summarizes some of the select attributes for the analysis techniques presented in this book. These attributes will be covered in greater detail in each chapter covering a particular technique. 3.5.2 Primary Hazard Analysis Techniques Of the 22 most commonly used techniques described in this book, there are seven techniques that are considered the primary techniques used by system safety practitioners. Table 3.5 lists these primary analysis techniques, along with the analysis type that each technique best fits. The primary analysis techniques were established and promulgated by MIL-STD-882 and have proven effective over many years of usage. These seven hazard analysis techniques provide the majority of hazard analysis on an SSP. It is recommended that the system safety engineer/analyst be especially familiar with these techniques. 3.6 INDUCTIVE AND DEDUCTIVE TECHNIQUES System safety hazard analysis techniques are quite often labelled as being either an inductive or deductive methodology. For example, a failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is usually referred to as an inductive approach, while an fault tree analysis is referred to as a deductive approach. Understanding how to correctly use the terms inductive and deductive is often confusing and even sometimes incorrectly applied. The question is: What do these terms really mean, how should they be used, and does their use provide any value to the safety analyst? The terms deductive and inductive refer to forms of logic. Deductive comes from deductive reasoning and inductive comes from inductive reasoning. The great detective Sherlock Holmes was a master of both deductive and inductive reasoning in solving criminal cases from clues, premises, and information. Deductive reasoning is a logical process in which a conclusion is drawn from a set of premises and contains no more information than the premises taken collectively. For example, all dogs are animals; this is a dog; therefore, this is an animal. The truth of the conclusion is dependent upon the premises; the conclusion cannot be false if the premises on which it is based are true. For example, all men are apes; this is a man; therefore, this is an ape. The conclusion seems logically true, however, it is false because the premise is false. In deductive reasoning the conclusion does not exceed or imply more than the premises upon which it is based. Inductive reasoning is a logical process in which a conclusion is proposed that contains more information than the observation or experience on which it is based. For example, every crow ever seen was black; therefore, all crows are black. The truth of the conclusion is verifiable only in terms of future experience, and certainty is attainable only if all possible instances have been examined. 3.6 INDUCTIVE AND DEDUCTIVE TECHNIQUES 49 In the example, there is no certainty that a white crow will not be found tomorrow, although past experience would make such an occurrence seem unlikely. In inductive reasoning the conclusion is broader and may imply more than the known premises can guarantee with the data available. Given these definitions, an inductive hazard analysis might conclude more than the given data intends to yield. This is useful for general hazard identification. It means a safety analyst might try to identify (or conclude) a hazard from limited design knowledge or information. For example, when analysing the preliminary design of a high-speed subway system, a safety analyst might conclude that the structural failure of a train car axle is a potential hazard that could result in car derailment and passenger injury. The analyst does not know this for sure; there is no conclusive evidence available, but the conclusion appears reasonable from past knowledge and experience. In this case the conclusion seems realistic but is beyond any factual knowledge or proof available at the time of the analysis; however, a credible hazard has been identified. A deductive hazard analysis would conclude no more than the data provides. In the above example, the analysis must go in the opposite direction. The specific causal factors supporting the conclusion must be identified and established, and then the conclusion will be true. It seems like reverse logic, however, the hazard can be validly deduced only from the specific detailed causal factors. Deductive and inductive qualities have become intangible attributes of hazard analysis techniques. An inductive analysis would be used to broadly identify hazards without proven assurance of the causal factors, while a deductive analysis would attempt to find the specific causal factors for identified hazards. An inductive analysis can be thought of as a “what-if” analysis. The analyst asks: What if this part failed, what are the consequences? A deductive analysis can be thought of as a “how-can” analysis. The analyst asks, if this event were to occur, how can it happen or what are the causal factors? In system safety, inductive analysis tends to be for hazard identification (when the specific root causes are not known or proven), and deductive analysis for root cause identification (when the hazard is known). Obviously, there is a fine line between these definitions because sometime the root causes are known from the start of an inductive hazard analysis. This is why some analysis techniques can actually move in both directions. The preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) is a good example of this. Using the standard preliminary hazard analysis worksheet, hazards are identified inductively by asking what if this component fails, and hazards are also identified by asking how can this undesired event happen. Two additional terms that are confusing to system safety analysts are top-down analysis and bottom-up analysis. In general, top-down analysis means starting the analysis from a high-level system viewpoint, for example, a missile navigation system, and continually burrowing into deeper levels of detail until the discrete component level is reached, such as a resistor or diode. A bottom-up analysis moves in the opposite direction. It begins at a low system level, such as the resistor or diode component, and moves upward until the system top level is reached. These definitions are illustrated in Figure 3.5. Some system safety practitioners advocate that a deductive analysis is always a top-down approach and that an inductive analysis is always a bottom-up approach. This may be a good generalization but is likely not always the case. Table 3.6 summarizes some of the characteristics of inductive and deductive analysis techniques. The bottom line is that in the long run it does not really matter to the safety analyst if a hazard analysis technique is inductive or deductive. An analyst does not select an analysis technique based on whether its methodology is inductive, deductive, top-down, or bottom-up. What is important is that there are various techniques available for identifying hazards and hazard causal factors and that the safety analyst knows how to correctly use and apply the appropriate techniques. An analyst is more concerned with the actual task of identifying and mitigating hazards. 3.7 QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE TECHNIQUES System safety analysts are often in a quandary as whether to use a qualitative analysis technique or a quantitative analysis technique. Understanding which analysis type to use, and when, often seems more of an art than a science. The qualitative–quantitative factor is one of the basic attributes of a hazard analysis technique. Most hazard analysis techniques are performed to identify hazards and then determine the mishap risk of the hazard, where mishap risk is defined as risk ¼probabilityseverity. The probability risk factor means the probability of the mishap actually occurring, given the latent hazard conditions and the severity factor means the damage and/or loss resulting from the mishap after it occurs. To deter-mine the risk of an identified hazard, a risk characterization methodology must be utilized for the probability and severity parameters. Both quantitative and qualitative risk characterization methods have been developed for use in the system safety discipline. Both approaches are useful, but each approach contains inherent unique advantages and disadvantages. Qualitative analysis involves the use of qualitative criterion in the analysis. Typically this approach uses categories to separate different parameters, with qualitative definitions that establish the ranges for each category. Qualitative judgments are made as to which category something might fit into. This approach has the characteristic of being subjective, but it allows more generalization and is therefore less restricting. For example, arbitrary categories have been established in MIL-STD-882 that provide a qualitative measure of the most reasonable likelihood of occurrence of a mishap. For example, if the safety analyst assesses that an event will occur frequently, it is assigned an index level A; if it occurs occasionally, it is given an index level C. This qualitative index value is then used in qualitative risk calculations and assessments. Quantitative analysis involves the use of numerical or quantitative data in the analysis and provides a quantitative result. This approach has the characteristic of being more objective and possibly more accurate. It should be noted, however, that quantitative results can be biased by the validity and accuracy of the input numbers. For this reason, quantitative results should not be viewed as an exact number but as an estimate with a range of variability depending upon the goodness quality of the data. Table 3.7 identifies some of the attributes that can be used to judge the strengths and weaknesses of qualitative and quantitative approaches. The system safety discipline primarily uses the qualitative risk characterization approach for a majority of safety work, based on the advantages provided. This approach has been recommended in MIL-STD-882 since the original version in 1969. System safety prefers the qualitative risk characterization method because for a large system with many hazards it can become cost prohibitive to quantitatively analyze and predict the risk of each and every hazard. In addition, low-risk hazards do not require the refinement provided by quantitative analysis. It may be necessary to conduct a quantitative analysis only on a select few high-consequence hazards. Experience over the years has proven that qualitative methods are very effective and in most cases provide decision-making capability comparable to quantitative analysis. Qualitative risk characterization provides a very practical and effective approach when cost and time are concerns and/or when the availability of supporting data is low. The key to developing a qualitative risk characterization approach is by carefully defining severity and mishap probability categories. Quantitative risk characterization provides a useful approach when accuracy is required. Occasionally a numerical design requirement must be met, and the only way to provide evidence that it is met is through quantitative analysis. Probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) is a quantitative analysis that estimates the probability factor of mishap risk. For high-consequence systems it is often necessary to conduct a probabilistic risk assessment to determine all of the causal factors for a given mishap and their total probability of causing the mishap to occur. Scientific theory teaches that when something can be measured (quantitatively) more is known about it, and therefore numerical results provide more value. This is generally true; however, the strict use of quantitative methods must be tempered by utility. Sometimes qualitative judgments provide useful results at less time and expense. In a risk assessment, precise numerical accuracy is not always necessary. Mishap risks are not easily estimated using probability and statistics when the hazard causal factors are not yet well understood. Qualitative measures provide a useful and valid judgment at much less expense than quantitative measures, and they can be obtained much earlier in the system development life cycle. It makes sense to first evaluate all identified hazards qualitatively, and then, for high-risk hazards conduct a quantitative analysis for more precise knowledge. In any evaluation of mishap risk assessment, the question of measure and accept-ability parameters arises. There is always the danger that system safety analysts and managers will become so enamoured with probability and statistics that simpler and more meaningful engineering processes will be ignored. Before embarking in a particular direction, be sure that the limitations and principles of both approaches are well understood, as well as the actual analysis needs. Quantitative models are useful, but do not ever equate mathematical model results with reality. 3.8 SUMMARY This chapter discussed the basic concept of hazard analysis types and techniques. The following are basic principles that help summarize the discussion in this chapter: 1. A hazard analysis type defines the analysis purpose, timing, scope, level of detail, and system coverage; it does not specify how to perform the analysis. 2. A hazard analysis technique defines a specific and unique analysis methodology that provides a specific methodology and results. 3. The seven hazard analysis types, their coverage, and intended focus are summarized in Table 3.8. In addition, the primary technique for satisfying the type requirements is listed. 4. There are seven hazard analysis types in the system safety discipline that, together, help ensure identification and resolution of system hazards. There are over 100 different analysis techniques that can be used to satisfy the analysis type requirements. 5. One particular hazard analysis type does not necessarily identify all the hazards within a system; it may take more than one type, and usually all seven types. 6. A best practice state safety program includes all seven hazard analysis types to ensure complete hazard coverage and provide optimum safety assurance. 7. The seven primary hazard analysis techniques are generally the best option for satisfying the corresponding analysis type requirement in an SSP.