Title: Hazard Analysis Techniques for System Safety– Chapter(s) 6 Author(s): Clifton A. Ericson, II Category: Hazard, Safety Tags: Hazard, Analysis, System, Safety INTRODUCTION The subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA) technique is a safety analysis tool for identifying hazards, their associated causal factors, effects, level of risk, and mitigating design measures. It is performed when detailed design information is available as it provides a methodology for analyzing in greater depth the causal factors for hazards previously identified by earlier analyses, such as the preliminary hazard analysis (PHA). The subsystem hazard analysis helps derive detailed system safety requirements (SSRs) for incorporating design safety methods into the system design. 6.2 BACKGROUND This analysis technique falls under the detailed design hazard analysis type (DD-HAT) because it evaluates design at the detailed subsystem level of design information. The analysis types are described in Chapter 3. The purpose of the subsystem hazard analysis is to expand upon the analysis of previously identified hazards and to identify new hazards from detailed design information. The subsystem hazard analysis provides for the identification of detailed causal factors of known and newly identified hazards and, in turn, provides for the identification of detailed SSRs for design. The subsystem hazard analysis provides a safety focus from a detailed subsystem viewpoint through analysis of the subsystem structure and components. The subsystem hazard analysis helps verify subsystem compliance with safety requirements contained in subsystem specifications. The subsystem hazard analysis is applicable to the analysis of all types of systems and subsystems and is typically performed at the detailed component level of a subsystem. The subsystem hazard analysis is usually performed during detailed design development and helps to guide the detailed design for safety. The technique provides sufficient thoroughness to identify hazards and detailed hazard causal factors when applied to a given system/subsystem by experienced safety personnel. An understanding of hazard analysis theory, as well as knowledge of system safety concepts, is essential. Experience with and/or a good working knowledge of the particular type of system and subsystem is necessary in order to identify and analyze all hazards. The methodology is uncomplicated and easily learned. Standard subsystem hazard analysis forms and instructions have been developed and are included in this chapter. The subsystem hazard analysis is an in-depth and detailed analysis of hazards previously identified by the preliminary hazard analysis and also identifies new hazards. It requires detailed design information and a good understanding of the system's design and operation. The use of the subsystem hazard analysis technique is recommended for the identification of subsystem-level hazards and further investigation of detailed causal factors of previously identified hazards. A fault hazard analysis (FaHA) or failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) may be done in place of the SSHA. Using these alternate techniques is not recommended. Both the fault hazard analysis and failure mode and effects analysis techniques focus on failure modes and can, therefore, miss or overlook certain hazards. 6.3 HISTORY The technique was established very early in the history of the system safety discipline. It was formally instituted and promulgated by the developers of MIL-STD-882. It was developed to replace the fault hazard analysis technique, which was previously used for the hazard analysis of subsystems. 6.4 THEORY The subsystem hazard analysis is performed to evaluate previously identified hazards at the subsystem level, identify new subsystem-level hazards and determine mishap risk. The subsystem hazard analysis refines the hazard causal factors to the detailed root cause level. Through this refining process, the subsystem hazard analysis ensures that SSRs adequately control hazards at the subsystem design level. The subsystem hazard analysis is a robust, rigorous, and structured methodology that consists of utilizing both detailed design information and known hazard information to identify hazards and their detailed causal factors. Hazards from the preliminary hazard analysis are imported into the SSHA, and the causal factors are identified from the detailed component design information. The subsystem hazard analysis can be structured to follow an indentured equipment list (IEL) that has been expanded in detail from the IEL used in the PHA. Output from the subsystem hazard analysis includes identified and suspected hazards, hazard causal factors, the resulting mishap effect, and safety-critical factors. subsystem hazard analysis output also includes design methods and SSRs established to eliminate and/or mitigate identified hazards with unacceptable risk. The subsystem hazard analysis also identifies safety critical functions (SCFs) and top-level mishaps (TLMs) that provide a safety focus during the design process. Figure 6.1 shows an overview of the subsystem hazard analysis process and summarizes the important relationships involved. 6.5 METHODOLOGY The subsystem hazard analysis methodology is shown in Figure 6.2. The subsystem hazard analysis process uses different kinds of design information to stimulate hazard identification. The analysis begins with hazards identified by the PHA. Hazard checklists (or catalogs) and undesired mishap checklists are employed to help identify new hazards previously unseen. Three of the best tools for aiding the subsystem hazard analysis analyst are the functional flow diagram, the reliability block diagram, and an indentured equipment list, all of which are derived from the system design. Using the detailed design information that is available during the SSHA, hazard causal factors can be evaluated in greater detail. The functional block diagram simplifies system design and operation for clarity and understanding. It shows the relationships and interfaces between subsystems. It also shows the functions that must be performed by the system. The indentured equipment list identifies all of the specific hardware and software in the system design. By comparing the detailed equipment to known hazard checklists, hazards are easily identified. Table 6.1 lists and describes the basic steps of the subsystem hazard analysis process. The subsystem hazard analysis process involves performing a detailed analysis of each subsystem in the system under investigation. As a minimum, when performing the SSHA, consideration should be given to the following: 1. Performance of the subsystem hardware 2. Performance degradation of the subsystem hardware 3. Inadvertent functioning of the subsystem hardware 4. Functional failure of the subsystem hardware 5. Common mode failures 6. Timing errors 7. Design errors or defects 8. Human error and the human system interface design 9. Software errors and the software–machine interface 10. Functional relationships or interfaces between components and equipment comprising each subsystem 6.6 WORKSHEET It is desirable to perform the subsystem hazard analysis analysis using a worksheet. The worksheet will help to add rigor to the analysis, record the process and data, and help support justification for the identified hazards and safety recommendations. The format of the analysis worksheet is not critical, and typically columnar-type worksheets are utilized. As a minimum, the following basic information should be obtained from the subsystem hazard analysis analysis worksheet: 1. Hazards 2. Hazard effects (mishaps) 3. Detailed hazard causal factors (materials, processes, excessive exposures, failures, etc.) 4. Risk assessment (before and after design safety features are implemented) 5. Recommendations for eliminating or mitigating the hazards (which can be converted into derived SSRs). The recommended subsystem hazard analysis worksheet for state safety program usage is the columnar format shown in Figure 6.3. This particular worksheet format has proven useful and effective in many applied situations and provides all of the information required from an SSHA. The following instructions describe the information required under each column entry of the subsystem hazard analysis worksheet: 1. System This entry identifies the system under analysis. 2. Subsystem This entry identifies the subsystem under analysis. 3. Analyst: This entry identifies the name of the subsystem hazard analysis analyst. 4. Date: This entry identifies the date of the analysis. 5. Hazard Number This column identifies the number assigned to the identified hazard in the subsystem hazard analysis (e.g., SSHA-1, SSHA-2). This is for future reference to the particular hazard source and may be used, for example, in the hazard action record (HAR). 6. Hazard This column identifies the specific hazard being postulated. (Remember, document all hazard considerations, even if they are proven nonhazardous.) The subsystem hazard analysis is started by transferring all hazards from the preliminary hazard analysis into the subsystem hazard analysis for a more thorough, detailed analysis. 7. Causes This column identifies conditions, events, or faults that could cause the hazard to exist and the events that can trigger the hazardous elements to become mishaps or accidents. The detailed design information that Is available during the subsystem hazard analysis provides for the identification of the specific hazard causal factors. 8. Effects This column identifies the hazard's effect and consequences, assuming it occurs. Generally, the worst-case result is the stated effect. 9. Mode This entry identifies the system mode(s) of operation or operational phases where the identified hazard is of concern. 10. Initial Mishap Risk Index (IMRI) This column provides a qualitative measure of mishap risk significance for the potential effect of the identified hazard, given that no mitigation techniques are applied. Risk measures are a combination of mishap severity and probability, and the recommended values from MIL-STD-882 are shown below. 11. Recommended Action This column establishes recommended preventive measures to eliminate or mitigate the identified hazards. Recommendations generally include guideline safety requirements from existing sources or a proposed mitigation method eventually translated into a newly derived system safety requirements intended to mitigate the hazard. SSRs are generated after coordination with the design and requirements organizations. Hazard mitigation methods should follow the preferred order of precedence established in MIL-STD-882 for invoking or developing safety requirements, as shown below. Order of Precedence 1. Eliminate hazards through design selection. 2. Control hazards through design methods. 3. Control hazards through safety devices. 4. Control hazards through warning devices. 5. Control hazards through procedures and training. 12. Final Mishap Risk Index (FMRI) This column provides a qualitative measure of mishap risk significance for the potential effect of the identified hazard, given that mitigation techniques and safety requirements are applied to the hazard. The same values used in column 10 are also used here. 13. Comments This column provides a place to record useful information regarding the hazard or the analysis process. 14. Status This column states the hazard's current status as either open or closed. 6.7 GUIDELINES The following are some basic guidelines that should be followed when completing the subsystem hazard analysis worksheet: 1. Remember that the objective of the subsystem hazard analysis is to identify detailed subsystem causes of identified hazards, plus previously undiscovered hazards. It refines risk estimates and mitigation methods. 2. Isolate the subsystem and only look within that subsystem for hazards. The effect of an subsystem hazard analysis hazard only goes to the subsystem boundary. The system hazard analysis identifies hazards at the subsystem hazard analysis interface and includes interface boundary causal factors. 3. Start the subsystem hazard analysis by populating the subsystem hazard analysis worksheet with hazards identified from the PHA. Evaluate the subsystem components to identify the specific causal factors to these hazards. In effect, the preliminary hazard analysis functional hazards and energy source hazards are transferred to the subsystem hazard analysis subsystem responsible for those areas. 4. Identify new hazards and their causal factors by evaluating the subsystem hardware components and software modules. Use analysis airborne integrated data system to help recognize and identify new hazards, such as TLMs, hazard checklists, lessons learned, mishap investigations, and hazards from similar systems. 5. Most hazards will be inherent-type hazards (contact with high voltage, excessive weight, fire, etc.). Some hazards may contribute to system hazards (e.g., inadvertent missile launch), but generally, several subsystems will be required for this type of system hazard (thus, the need for SHA). 6. Consider erroneous input to subsystem as the cause of a subsystem hazard (command fault). 7. The preliminary hazard analysis and subsystem hazard analysis hazards establish the TLMs, which are used in the system hazard analysis for hazard identification. Continue establishing TLMs and SCFs as the subsystem hazard analysis progresses and utilize them in the analysis. 8. The hazard write-up in the subsystem hazard analysis worksheet should be clear and understandable, with as much information as necessary to understand the hazard. 9. The subsystem hazard analysis hazard column does not have to contain all three elements of a hazard: hazardous element (HE), initiating mechanisms (IMs), and outcome (O). The combined columns of the subsystem hazard analysis worksheet can contain all three components of a hazard. For example, placing the HE in the hazard section, the IMs in the cause section, and the O in the effect section is acceptable. The hazard, causes, and effects columns should describe the hazard together. These columns should provide the three sides of the hazard triangle. 10. The subsystem hazard analysis does not evaluate functions unless the function resides entirely within the subsystem. Functions tend to cross subsystem boundaries and are therefore evaluated in the SHA. 6.8 EXAMPLE: ACE MISSILE SYSTEM The same hypothetical small missile system from Chapters 4 and 5 will be used to demonstrate the subsystem hazard analysis methodology. The basic system design information provided is shown in Figure 6.5. The subsystem hazard analysis is initiated when sufficient detailed subsystem design data becomes available. The IEL shown in Table 6.2 shows the information available for the preliminary hazard analysis and the SSHA. The IEL shows all of the system equipment as it is “indentured” by system, subsystem, assembly, unit, and component. A hierarchy of equipment establishes relationships, interfaces, and equipment types. When establishing which equipment level should go into the preliminary hazard analysis and which should go into the SSHA, the basic ground rule is that the higher level of detail goes into the PHA, and the more detailed breakdown goes into the SSHA. Sometimes, the decision is quite obvious, while at other times, the decision is somewhat arbitrary. In this example, the computer software would be included in the preliminary hazard analysis as a general category, and it would also be included in the subsystem hazard analysis when the indenture list is continued to a lower level of detail. It is also helpful to utilize functional flow diagrams (FFDs) of the system when performing the subsystem hazard analysis if they are available. The functional flow diagram shows the steps that must take place to perform a particular system function. It helps identify sub-system interfaces and relationships that can be used in the analysis. Sometimes, the system safety analyst must develop both IELs and FFDs if none have been developed by the project. Figure 6.8 is an functional flow diagram showing the elements and sequence of events required to generate the missile launch signal. Figure 6.9 is an functional flow diagram showing the elements and sequence of events required to generate the missile launch signal. During detailed design development, the system design has been modified and improved to include the following: 1. Spring-loaded wings have been added to the missile body. 2. The missile wings are normally closed within the missile's body and spring open after launch. 3. As a result of the PHA, a warhead-saving function has been added to the system design and the list of functions. The subsystem hazard analysis does not evaluate functions unless the function resides entirely within the subsystem. Functions tend to cross subsystem boundaries and are, therefore, evaluated in the SHA, which looks for system interface hazards. The subsystem hazard analysis is started by transferring the preliminary hazard analysis hazards to the hazard column of the SSHA. These hazards are then evaluated in detail for subsystem causal factors. Also, with the new detailed design information, additional hazards may be identified. Note that the preliminary hazard analysis hazards are repeated for each unit with the subsystem for the SSHA. The causal factors for that unit are then evaluated and applied against the hazard. In some cases, the unit cannot possibly contribute to the hazard, while in other cases, the detailed unit causes are identified. Demonstration that the unit cannot contribute to a hazard is a beneficial by-product of the SSHA. Note that the lower-level items in the system hierarchy table (i.e., IEL) are addressed by the SSHA, and the preliminary hazard analysis addresses the higher-level information. If a new subsystem hazard analysis worksheet were started for every IEL item, there would be a minimum of 14 worksheets (14 IEL items). To not overwhelm the reader, only five worksheets are provided (5 IEL items). These samples should provide sufficient information on how to perform the SSHA. Tables 6.3 through 6.7 contain the subsystem hazard analysis worksheets for the example missile system. The following should be noted from the subsystem hazard analysis of the Ace Missile System: 1. The recommended action is only sometimes in the form of an SSR. Additional research may be necessary to convert the recommendation into a meaningful design requirement. 2. Each of the preliminary hazard analysis hazards has been carried into the subsystem hazard analysis for further analysis and investigation. 3. Three new hazards were identified by the subsystem hazard analysis that were not in the PHA. 4. The original 10 TLMs from the preliminary hazard analysis have stayed the same and still apply. 6.9 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES The following are the advantages of the subsystem hazard analysis technique. The SSHA: 1. Provides rigor for focusing on hazards and detailed causal factors. 2. It focuses on hazards and not just failure modes, as is done in an FMEA. 3. Is cost-effective in providing meaningful results. There are no disadvantages to the subsystem hazard analysis technique. 6.10 COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID When first learning how to perform an SSHA, it is commonplace to commit some typical errors. The following is a list of common errors made during the conduct of an SSHA. 1. Not listing all concerns or credible hazards. It is essential to list all possible suspected or credible hazards and not leave any potential worries out of the analysis. 2. Failure to document hazards identified but found to be not credible. The subsystem hazard analysis is a historical document encompassing all hazard identification areas considered. 3. Not utilizing a structured approach of some type. Always use a worksheet and include all equipment, energy sources, functions, etc. 4. Not collecting and utilizing standard hazard source checklists. 5. Not researching similar systems or equipment for mishaps and lessons learned that can be applied. 6. Not establishing a correct list of hardware, functions, and mission phases. 7. Assuming the reader will understand the hazard description from a brief abbreviated statement filled with project-unique terms and acronyms. 8. Inadequately describing the identified hazard (insufficient detail, too much detail, incorrect hazard effect, wrong equipment indenture level, not identifying all three elements of a hazard, etc.). 9. Inadequately describing the causal factors (the identified causal factor does not support the hazard, needs to be more detailed, not all causal factors are identified, etc.). 10. Inadequately describing the hazard mishap risk index (MRI). For example, the MRI is not stated or is incomplete, the hazard severity level does not support actual hazardous effects, the final MRI is a higher risk than the initial MRI, the final severity level in the risk is less than the initial severity level (sometimes possible, but not usually), or the causal factors do not support the hazard probability. 11. Providing recommended hazard mitigation methods that do not address the causal factor(s). 12. Incorrectly closing the hazard. 13. Not establishing and utilizing a list of TLMs and SCFs. 6.11 SUMMARY This chapter discussed the subsystem hazard analysis technique. The following are basic principles that help summarize the discussion in this chapter: 1. The subsystem hazard analysis is an analysis tool for identifying system hazards, causal factors, mishap risk, and safety recommendations for mitigating risk. It is based on detailed design information. 2. The primary purpose of the subsystem hazard analysis is to identify and mitigate hazards in the design development process so that they can be influenced when the cost impact is minimal. 3. Using a specialized worksheet provides structure and rigor to the subsystem hazard analysis process. 4. A functional flow diagram, reliability block diagram, and indentured equipment list greatly airport information desk and simplify the subsystem hazard analysis process. 5. Do not exclude thoughts, ideas, or concerns when postulating hazards. In addition to identifying real hazards, it is also essential to show that specific hazards were suspected and considered, even though they were later found to not be possible for various design reasons. This provides evidence that all possibilities were considered. 6. Write a full, credible, and meaningful hazard description that is understandable to the reader and not just to the analyst. Refrain from assuming the reader understands the hazard from a brief abbreviated statement filled with project-unique terms and acronyms. 7. Identify the three elements comprising a hazard using the subsystem hazard analysis worksheet columns: Hazard Column Hazardous element (source) Causes Column Initiating mechanism (mechanism) Effects Column Target/threat (outcome)