4.1 INTRODUCTION The preliminary hazard list (PHL) is an analysis technique for identifying and listing potential hazards and mishaps that may exist in a system. The preliminary hazard list is performed during conceptual or preliminary design and is the starting point for all subsequent hazard analyses. Once a hazard is identified in the PHL, the hazard will be used to launch in-depth hazard analyses and evaluations, as more system design details become available. The preliminary hazard list is a means for management to focus on hazardous areas that may require more resources to eliminate the hazard or control risk to an acceptable level. Every hazard identified on the preliminary hazard list will be analyzed with more detailed analysis techniques. This analysis technique falls under the conceptual design hazard analysis type (CD-HAT). The preliminary hazard list evaluates design at the conceptual level, without detailed information, and it provides a preliminary list of hazards. There are no alternate names for this technique. 4.2 BACKGROUND The primary purpose of the preliminary hazard list is to identify and list potential system hazards. A secondary purpose of the preliminary hazard list is to identify safety critical parameters and mishap categories. The preliminary hazard list analysis is usually performed very early in the design development process and prior to performing any other hazard analysis. The preliminary hazard list is used as a management tool to allocate resources to particularly hazardous areas within the design, and it becomes the foundation for all other subsequent hazard analyses performed on the program. Follow-on hazard analyses will evaluate these hazards in greater detail as the design detail progresses. The intent of the preliminary hazard list is to affect the design for safety as early as possible in the development program. The preliminary hazard list is applicable to any type of system at a conceptual or preliminary stage of development. The preliminary hazard list can be performed on a subsystem, a single system, or an integrated set of systems. The preliminary hazard list is generally based on preliminary design concepts and is usually performed early in the development process, sometimes during the proposal phase or immediately after contract award in order to influence design and mishap risk decisions as the design is formulated and developed. The technique, when applied to a given system by experienced system safety personnel, is thorough at identifying high-level system hazards and generic hazards that may exist in a system. A basic understanding of hazard theory is essential as well as knowledge of system safety concepts. Experience with the particular type of system under investigation, and its basic components, is necessary in order to identify sys-tem hazards. The technique is uncomplicated and easily learned. Typical preliminary hazard list forms and instructions are provided in this chapter. The preliminary hazard list technique is similar to a brainstorming session, whereby hazards are postulated and collated in a list. This list is then the starting point for subsequent hazard analyses, which will validate the hazard and begin the process of identifying causal factors, risk, and mitigation methods. Generating a preliminary hazard list is a prerequisite to performing any other type of hazard analysis. Use of this technique is highly recommended. It is the starting point for more detailed hazard analysis and safety tasks, and it is easily performed. 4.3 HISTORY The technique was established very early in the history of the system safety discipline. It was formally instituted and promulgated by the developers of MIL-STD-882. 4.4 THEORY The preliminary hazard list is a simple and straightforward analysis technique that provides a list of known and suspected hazards. A preliminary hazard list analysis can be as simple as conducting a hazard brainstorming session on a system, or it can be a slightly more structured process that helps ensure that all hazards are identified. The preliminary hazard list method described here is a process with some structure and rigor, with the application of a few basic guidelines. The preliminary hazard list analysis should involve a group of engineers/analysts with expertise in a variety of specialized areas. The methodology described herein can be used by an individual analyst or a brainstorming group to help focus the analysis. The recommended methodology also provides a vehicle for documenting the analysis results on a worksheet. Figure 4.1 shows an overview of the basic preliminary hazard list process and summarizes the important relationships involved in the preliminary hazard list process. This process consists of combining design information with known hazard information to identify hazards. Known hazardous elements and mishap lessons learned are compared to the system design to determine if the design concept utilizes any of these potential hazard elements. To perform the preliminary hazard list analysis, the system safety analyst must have two things—design knowledge and hazard knowledge. Design knowledge means the analyst must posses a basic understanding of the system design, including a list of major components. Hazard knowledge means the analyst needs a basic understanding about hazards, hazard sources, hazard components, and hazards in similar systems. Hazard knowledge is primarily derived from hazard checklists and from lessons learned on the same or similar systems and equipment. In performing the preliminary hazard list analysis, the analyst compares the design knowledge and information to hazard checklists. This allows the analyst to visualize or postulate possible hazards. For example, if the analyst discovers that the system design will be using jet fuel, he then compares jet fuel to a hazard checklist. From the hazard checklist it will be obvious that jet fuel is a hazardous element and that a jet fuel fire/explosion is a potential mishap with many different ignition sources presenting many different hazards. The primary output from the preliminary hazard list is a list of hazards. It is also necessary and ben-eficial to collect and record additional information, such as the prime hazard causal factors (e.g., hardware failure, software error, human error, etc.), the major mishap category for the hazard (e.g., fire, inadvertent launch, physical injury, etc.), and any safety critical (SC) factors that will be useful for subsequent analysis (e.g., SC function, SC hardware item, etc.). 4.5 METHODOLOGY Table 4.1 lists and describes the basic steps of the preliminary hazard list process and summarizes the important relationships involved. A worksheet is utilized during this analysis process. The preliminary hazard list process begins by acquiring design information in the form of the design concept, the operational concept, major components planned for use in the system, major system functions, and software functions. Sources for this information could include: statement of work (SOW), design specifications, sketches, drawings, or schematics. Additional design integration data can be utilized to better understand, analyze, and model the system. Typical design integration data includes functional block diagrams, equipment indenture lists [e.g., work breakdown structure (WBS), reliability block diagrams, and concept of operations]. If the design integration data is not available, the safety analyst may have to make assumptions in order to perform the preliminary hazard list analysis. All assumptions should be documented. The next step in the preliminary hazard list analysis is to acquire the appropriate hazard checklists. Hazard checklists are generic lists of items known to be hazardous or that might cre-ate potentially hazardous designs or situations. The hazard checklist should not be considered complete or all-inclusive. Hazard checklists help trigger the analyst’s recognition of potential hazardous sources from past lessons learned. Typical hazard checklists include: 1. Energy sources 2. Hazardous functions 3. Hazardous operations 4. Hazardous components 5. Hazardous materials 6. Lessons learned from similar type systems 7. Undesired mishaps 8. Failure mode and failure state considerations When all of the data is available, the analysis can begin. preliminary hazard list analysis involves comparing the design and integration information to the hazard checklists. If the sys-tem design uses a known hazard component, hazardous function, hazardous oper-ation, and the like, then a potential hazard exists. This potential hazard is recorded on the analysis form and then further evaluated with the level of design information that is available. Checklists also airport information desk in the brainstorming process for new hazard possibilities brought about by the unique system design. preliminary hazard list output includes: identified hazards, hazard causal factor areas (if possible), resulting mis-hap effect, and safety critical factors (if any). The overall preliminary hazard list methodology is illustrated in Figure 4.2a. In this methodology a system list is constructed that identifies planned items in the hardware, energy sources, functions, and software categories. Items on the system list are then compared to items on the various safety checklists. Matches between the two lists triggers ideas for potential hazards, which are then compiled in the PHL. The overall preliminary hazard list methodology is demonstrated by the brief example in Figure 4.2b. The system in this example involves the conceptual design for a new nuclear-powered aircraft carrier system. From the design and operational concept information (Fig. 4.2) an indentured equipment list (IEL) is constructed for the PHL. The equipment on the IEL is then compared with the hazard checklists to stimulate hazard identification. For example, “Nuclear reactor” appears on the IEL and it also appears on the hazardous energy source checklist. This match (1a) triggers the identification of one or more possible hazards, such as “Reactor over temperature.” This hazard is then added to the preliminary hazard list (1b) as hazard 1. “Nuclear reactor” appears on the IEL and it also appears on the general mishaps checklist. This match (2a) triggers the identification of one or more possible hazards, “Accidental release of radioactive material.” This hazard is then added to the preliminary hazard list (2b) as hazard 4. “Missiles” appear on the IEL and “Inadvertent weapon launch” appears on the general mishaps checklist. This match (3a) triggers the identification of “inadvertent missile launch” as a possible hazard, which is added to the preliminary hazard list (3b) as hazard 6. 4.6 WORKSHEET It is desirable to perform the preliminary hazard list analysis using a worksheet. The worksheet will help to add rigor to the analysis, record the process and data, and help support jus-tification for the identified hazards. The format of the analysis worksheet is not criti-cal, and typically columnar-type worksheets are utilized. The following basic information should be obtained from the preliminary hazard list analysis worksheet: 1. Actual and suspected hazards 2. Top-level mishap 3. Recommendations (such as safety requirements/guidelines that can be applied) The primary purpose of a worksheet is to provide structure and documentation to the analysis process. The recommended preliminary hazard list worksheet for system safety usage is shown in Figure 4.3. In the preliminary hazard list worksheet in the Figure 4.3 second column contains a list of system items from which hazards can easily be recognized. For example, by listing all of the system functions, hazards can be postulated by answering the questions: What if the function fails to occur? or What if the function occurs inadvertently? The preliminary hazard list worksheet columns are defined as follows: 1. System Element Type This column identifies the type of system items under analysis, such as system hardware, system functions, system software, energy sources, and the like. 2. Hazard Number This column identifies the hazard number for reference purposes. 3. System Item This column is a subelement of data item 1 and identifies the major system items of interest in the identified category. In the example to fol-low, the items are first broken into categories of hardware, software, energy sources, and functions. Hazards are postulated through close examination of each listed item under each category. For example, if explosives is an intended hardware element, then explosives would be listed under hardware and again under energy sources. There may be some duplication, but this allows for the identification of all explosives-related hazards. 4. Hazard This column identifies the specific hazard that is created as a result of the indicated system item. (Remember: Document all potential hazards, even if they are later proven by other analyses to be nonhazardous in this application.) 5. Hazard Effects This column identifies the effect of the identified hazard. The effect would be described in terms of resulting system operation, misoperation, death, injury, damage, and so forth. Generally the effect is the resulting mishap. 6. Comments This column records any significant information, assumptions, recommendations, and the like resulting from the analysis. For example, safety critical functions (SCFs), top-level mishaps (TLMs), or system safety design guidelines might be identified here. HAZARD CHECKLISTS Hazard checklists provide a common source for readily recognizing hazards. Since no single checklist is ever really adequate in itself, it becomes necessary to develop and utilize several different checklists. Utilizing several checklists may generate some repetition, but will also result in improved coverage of hazardous elements. Remember that a checklist should never be considered a complete and final list but merely a mechanism or catalyst for stimulating hazard recognition. Refer to Appendix C of this book for a more complete set of hazard checklists. To illustrate the hazard checklist concept, some example checklists are provided in Figures 4.4 through 4.8. These example checklists are not intended to represent ultimate check-list sources, but are some typical example checklists used in recognizing hazards. Figure 4.4 is a checklist of energy sources that are considered to be hazardous elements when used within a system. The hazard is generally from the various modes of energy release that are possible from hazardous energy sources. For example, electricity/voltage is a hazardous energy source. The various hazards that can result from undesired energy release include personnel electrocution, ignition source for fuels and/or materials, sneak path power for an unintended circuit, and so forth. Figure 4.5 contains a checklist of general sources that have been found to produce hazardous conditions and potential accidents, when the proper system conditions are present. Figure 4.6 is a checklist of functions that are hazardous due to the critical nature of the mission. This checklist is an example particularly intended for space programs. Figure 4.7 is a checklist of operations that are considered hazardous due to the materials used or due to the critical nature of the operation. Figure 4.8 is a checklist of possible failure modes or failure states that are considered hazardous, depending on the critical nature of the operation or function involved. This checklist is a set of key questions to ask regarding the state of the component, subsystem, or system functions. These are potential ways the subsystem could fail and thereby result in creating a hazard. For example, when evaluating each subsystem, answering the question “Does fail to operate cause a hazard?” may lead to the recognition of a hazard. Note that when new hardware elements and functions are invented and used, new hazardous elements will be introduced requiring expanded and updated checklists. The following are some basic guidelines that should be followed when completing the preliminary hazard list worksheet: 1. Remember that the objective of the preliminary hazard list is to identify system hazards and/or mishaps. 2. The best approach is to start by investigating system hardware items, system functions, and system energy sources. 3. Utilize hazard checklists and lessons learned for hazard recognition.4. A hazard write-up should be understandable but does not have to be detailed in description (i.e., the preliminary hazard list hazard does not have to include all three elements of a hazard: hazardous element, initiating mechanisms, and outcome). Chapter 2 described the three components of a hazard: (1) hazardous element, (2) initiating mechanism, and (3) Threat and target (outcome). Typically when a hazard is identified and described, the hazard write-up description will identify and include all three components. However, in the PHL, a complete and full hazard description is not always provided. This is primarily because of the preliminary nature of the analysis and that all identified hazards are more fully investigated and described in the preliminary hazard analysis (PHA) and subsystem hazard analysis (SSHA). Figure 4.9 shows how to apply the preliminary hazard list guidelines when using the preliminary hazard list worksheet. 4.9 EXAMPLE: ACE MISSILE SYSTEM In order to demonstrate the preliminary hazard list methodology, a hypothetical small missile system will be analyzed. The basic system design is shown in Figure 4.10 for the Ace Missile System. The major segments of the system are the missile segment and the weapon control system (WCS) segment. The missile segment includes only those components specifically comprising the missile. The weapon control system segment includes those components involved in command and control over the missile, such as the operator’s console, system computer, radar, system power, and so forth. The basic equipment and functions for this system are identified in Figure 4.11. During the conceptual design stage, this is the typical level of information that is available. Some basic design decisions may be necessary, such as the type of engine to be utilized, jet or solid rocket. A design safety trade study might be performed to evaluate the hazards of a jet system versus a rocket system. From this basic design information a very credible list of hazards can easily be generated. Figure 4.12 shows the basic planned operational phases for the missile system. As design development progresses, each of these phases will be expanded in greater detail. The lists of components, functions, and phases are generated by the missile project designers or the safety analyst. The preliminary hazard list begins by comparing each system component and function to hazard checklists, to stimulate ideas on potential hazards involved with this system design. Tables 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 contain a preliminary hazard list analysis of the system hardware, functions, and energy sources, respectively. For example, Table 4.2 evaluates system hardware starting with the first component in the IEL, missile body, then the warhead, then the engine, and so forth. In this example, the preliminary hazard list worksheet was developed as a single long table extending over several pages, but the worksheet could have been broken into many single pages. The following results should be noted from the preliminary hazard list analysis of the Ace Missile System: 1. A total of 40 hazards have been identified by the preliminary hazard list analysis. 2. No recommended action resulted from the preliminary hazard list analysis, only the identification of hazards. These hazards provide design guidance to the system areas that will present mishap risk and require further design attention for safety. 3. Each of the 40 hazards identified in the preliminary hazard list will be carried into the preliminary hazard analysis for further analysis and investigation. 4. Although this preliminary hazard list did not focus on SCFs and TLMs, it is possible to start generating this information, as shown in Table 4.5. The TLMs shown in Table 4.5 have been established from the entire list of preliminary hazard list hazards. All of the identified hazards have been consolidated into these top-level mishap categories. After establishing the TLMs, it was then possible to identify SCFs that are associated with certain TLMs, as shown in Table 4.5. The following are advantages of the preliminary hazard list technique: 1. The preliminary hazard list is easily and quickly performed. 2. The preliminary hazard list does not require considerable expertise for technique application. 3. The preliminary hazard list is comparatively inexpensive yet provides meaningful results. 4. The preliminary hazard list process provides rigor for focusing on hazards. 5. The preliminary hazard list provides an indication of where major system hazards and mishap risk will exist. There are no disadvantages of the preliminary hazard list technique. 4.11 COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID When first learning how to perform a PHL, it is commonplace to commit some typical errors. The following is a list of errors often made during the conduct of a preliminary hazard list 1. Not listing all concerns or credible hazards. It is important to list all possible suspected or credible hazards and not leave any potential concerns out of the analysis. 2. Failure to document hazards identified but found to be not credible. The preliminary hazard list is a historical document encompassing all hazard identification areas that were considered. 3. Not utilizing a structured approach of some type. Always use a worksheet and include all equipment, energy sources, functions, and the like. 4. Not collecting and utilizing common hazard source checklists. 5. Not researching similar systems or equipment for mishaps and lessons learned that can be applied. 6. Not establishing a correct list of hardware, functions, and mission phases. 7. Assuming the reader will understand the hazard description from a brief abbreviated statement filled with project-unique terms and acronyms. This chapter discussed the preliminary hazard list analysis technique. The following are basic principles that help summarize the discussion in this chapter: 1. The primary purpose of preliminary hazard list analysis is to identify potential hazards and mishaps existing in a system conceptual design. 2. The preliminary hazard list provides hazard information that serves as a starting point for the PHA. 3. The preliminary hazard list is an airport information desk for safety and design decision making early in the development program and provides information on where to apply safety and design resources during the development program. 4. The use of a functional flow diagram and an indentured equipment list greatly airborne integrated data system and simplifies the preliminary hazard list process. 5. In performing the PHL, hazard checklists are utilized. However, a hazard checklist should never be considered a complete and final list but merely a catalog for stimulating hazard ideas. 6. Do not exclude any thoughts, ideas, or concerns when postulating hazards. In addition to identifying real hazards, it is also important to show that certain hazards were suspected and considered, even though they were later found to not be possible for various design reasons. This provides evidence that all possibilities were considered. 7. Write a full, credible, and meaningful hazard description that is understand-able to the reader and not just to the analyst. Do not assume the reader under-stands the hazard from a brief abbreviated statement filled with project-unique terms and acronyms. 8. When possible, identify the three elements comprising a hazard: Hazardous element (source) . Initiating mechanism (mechanism) . Target/threat (outcome) 9. Typically, when a hazard is identified and described, the hazard write-up description will identify and include all three elements of a hazard. However, in the preliminary hazard list a complete and full hazard description is not always provided. This is primarily because of the preliminary nature of the analysis, and that all identified hazards are more fully investigated and described in the PHA.