Title: Investigating Human Error Incidents, Accidents, and Complex Systems – Chapter(s) 5 - 6 Author(s): Barry Strauch Category: Safety Tags: Human, Error, Investigation, Accidents, Incidents, System 5 The Operator Each person—the butcher, the parent, the child—occupies a different position in the world, which leads to a unique set of experiences, assumptions, and expectations about the situations and objects they encounter. Everything is perceived, chosen, or rejected based on this framework. Vaughan, 1996 The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at national aeronautics and space administration Introduction Our uniqueness as individuals—how we were raised and educated, our work experiences, and our genetic makeup- affect how we perceive and act upon the world. Because of these differences, two operators encountering identical system states could perceive them differently, even if they have had identical training and similar backgrounds. In the past, investigations of error largely focused on the operator, often to the exclusion of other system elements that may have contributed as much, if not more, to operator errors than factors related to the operator who had committed the errors. For example, checklists that were developed to guide investigations of error, many of which are still widely used today, focus primarily on the characteristics of the operator rather than other system elements (e.g., International Civil Aviation Organization, 1993). The role of the operator has changed over the years as technology has advanced and been increasingly implemented into complex systems. With this change, the role of the operator has changed, and he or she increasingly interacts with the system through technology. This has also changed the type of errors operators commit from action errors to more cognitive ones (Coury et al., 2010). The approach to investigating error advocated in this text considers operator-related factors within a broad view of error. It does not minimize the influence of operator factors in incident and accident causation; these can, and do, affect performance and lead to error. Rather, it puts the error in the context of the system in which he or she operates, 86 with consideration of antecedents that are associated with both action and ­ cognitive errors. The central role of the operator in complex systems operations requires investigators to recognize the role of operator factors in system performance, factors that are associated with both action and cognitive type errors. This chapter will focus on operator-related antecedents to explain the effects of these factors on operator performance. Physiological Factors Operator-related antecedents can be categorized into one of two general classes: physiological or behavioral. Each includes antecedents with which most of us are familiar, having likely observed their effects in our own experiences, and each can affect operator performance over both the short and long term. Physiological antecedents can temporarily or permanently degrade operator performance by impairing the operator or otherwise degrading his performance. The number of potential physiological antecedents that can influence operator error is sizeable, and numerous medical and physiological texts, journals, and articles have examined them. The major ways that physiological antecedents can degrade operator performance and lead to error will be reviewed, and data needed to determine if a relationship between the two exists suggested, but a full discussion of these antecedents is beyond the scope of this text. General Impairment Illness Because operators must interpret data, recognize situations, anticipate system performance, and make decisions to effectively oversee system operations, any condition that degrades their cognitive skills could serve as an antecedent to error. Physiological antecedents can increase reaction times, interfere with cognition, and limit recall ability, among other impairing effects. An operator is impaired when the quality of his or her performance has been degraded to a level below that needed to function effectively and safely. Operators are expected to notify their superiors when they are unfit for duty so that others can be found to serve in their place. However, many do not recognize the subtle effects of degrading factors on their performance and will report to work when they are ill or otherwise unfit for duty. They remove themselves from system operations only when their illness or discomfort is self-evidently impairing, without realizing the adverse effects of subtle impairment from the illness on their performance and on safety. 87 Researchers have found that even mild illness and discomfort, well below what many consider impairing, may still degrade performance and create antecedents to error. Smith (1990) examined the effects of two fairly minor illnesses, colds and influenza, on performance, ailments that account for what he termed a substantial proportion of all consultations in general medical practice. He measured the cognitive skills and reaction times of volunteers who had been infected with a cold or influenza virus and compared them with those who had been given a placebo. Those who were infected demonstrated significantly poorer cognitive performance and reaction times than those who were not infected, and many of those demonstrating degraded performance were in the incubation periods of their illnesses and, thus, asymptomatic. Medications The potential effects of both prescribed and over-the-counter medications on operators vary according to the potency of the drug, the amount taken, the time since taking the drug, the rate at which the drug is metabolized, the presence of other drugs in the operators’ systems, and individual variation in response to the drugs in question. The side effects of many drugs in and of themselves may adversely affect performance. For example, sedating antihistamines, found in many over-the-counter colds and allergy medications, slow reaction time and cause drowsiness. Their effects on operator performance can last hours after being consumed. Weiler et al. (2000) found that the performance of automobile drivers in a driving simulator was as adversely affected by an antihistamine, diphenhydramine, found in over-the-counter cold medications as it was by alcohol. In 1998, a commercial bus ran off the road and struck a parked truck after the bus driver had fallen asleep, killing him and six of the passengers (National Transportation Safety Board, 2000a). Toxicological analysis of specimens from the body of the driver revealed the presence of diphenhydramine and two other drugs, all contained in an over-the-counter preparation marketed for the treatment of colds and allergies. The amount of the drugs and their rates of metabolism indicated that the driver had likely taken the medication several hours before the accident. Investigators concluded that the drug exacerbated the effects of two additional antecedents, an irregular sleep-work cycle and the time of day, to cause the driver to fall asleep while driving. In a retrospective study, the National Transportation Safety Board examined fatal accidents in a variety of transportation modes in the United States (National Transportation Safety Board, 2000b). Prescription medications were found in the bodies of over 21% of the general aviation pilots killed in aircraft accidents in 1 year and in many of the bodies of operators killed in accidents in other transportation modes as well. Investigators concluded that both prescription and over-the-counter medications had impaired the operators and led to the accidents. 88 Operators whose performance was adversely affected by prescribed medications may have ingested multiple medications. In that case, there may be difficulty determining whether the effects of the medications were additive, where the effects of each medication added to those of the other medications taken, or interactive, where the influence of the medications on performance may have differed from more typical side effects because of the influence of the other medications in the person’s system. While many prescribed medications, such as blood pressure drugs, have little effect on cognitive performance, others, particularly opiate pain drugs and antianxiety medications, known as benzodiazepines (e.g., Xanax, Prozac), have been demonstrated to adversely affect cognitive performance (e.g., Allen et al., 2003; Zacny, 2003). Potential adverse effects of drugs on performance can be found in such references as the Physicians’ Desk Reference, Internet information that manufacturers have made available, or published research. Many over-the-counter medications carry generalized warnings on their labels about the hazards of driving or operating heavy machinery after use, but these warnings are often written in small font, and many users neither read the warnings nor recognize the need to apply them to their own situations. The extensive promotion of these drugs, their widespread availability and use, and the frequent lack of awareness of their side effects increase the likelihood that operators will use them without recognizing their potential to impair and degrade performance. Prescription medications, which are required to have adverse effects listed and provided to patients, also may have their side effects ignored by users. Further, when the medications are dispensed, the physicians prescribing the medications and the pharmacists dispensing them may not inform users of potential adverse effects. Often, people need to determine medication effects on their own, either by reading the information provided by the pharmacy or through internet sources. Many may be unaware of the effects of the medications they are taking on their performance. This may be an issue in the performance of operators in industries where few operators are aware of medication side effects or the need to attend to them, or in industries in which the use of medications may be prohibited, and hence their use can lead to job loss. In those instances, operators may keep their medication use and/or medical conditions hidden from their employers. Investigators should also recognize that medication use, whether prescribed or over the counter, may indicate an underlying medical condition that itself could be impairing. In those instances, medical records from the prescribing physicians are likely to be helpful in explaining the nature of the condition that led to the medication use. Alcohol and Drugs of Abuse The effects of few, if any, drugs have been studied as much as those of alcohol. Even small amounts of alcohol can impair performance in a variety of cognitive and motor tasks (e.g., Ross and Mundt, 1988; McFadden, 1997). 89 A direct relationship has been established between the amount of alcohol in the bloodstream, measured by blood alcohol content or BAC, and the extent of impairment. The higher the BAC, the more impaired the person. In most of the United States, 8% BAC is considered impairing for automobile drivers, but at lower levels, typically 5% BAC, it is considered impairing by medical researchers. Unusually high BAC concentrations, say 20% BAC or higher in an individual who is still able to function at some level, may indicate alcohol- dependency or addiction. Those addicted to alcohol or other substances may experience withdrawal after a period of abstinence of even a few hours, withdrawal that can also impair performance (Tiffany, 1999). For example, cocaine, a highly addictive drug (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 1999), is a stimulant. After its effects have worn off, cocaine users will likely be fatigued, particularly if they had taken the drug at a time when they would ordinarily have been asleep. Because fatigue impairs cognitive performance, the effects of withdrawal from sustained use of cocaine—effects that include mood alteration in addition to sleep disruption—can create antecedents to error. Investigators determined that the pilot of a regional aircraft that crashed on approach to Durango, Colorado, had been fatigued after ingesting cocaine the night before the accident (National Transportation Safety Board, 1989). He and the first officer were flying a challenging approach through the Rocky Mountains and were about to land when they struck the ground several miles from the runway. Postmortem toxicological analysis of specimens from the captain’s body found benzoylecgonine, cocaine’s principal metabolite. Given the amount of the drug and its metabolite that were found and the rate of cocaine metabolism, investigators determined that he had consumed the drug between 12 and 18 hours before the accident. Because the accident occurred at 6:20 p.m. local time, he would likely have consumed the cocaine the night before, at a time when he would ordinarily have been asleep, thus disrupting his normal sleep pattern. Further, after taking the cocaine, he would have been expected to have encountered difficulty sleeping until the effects of the drug had worn off. Investigators concluded that the captain’s piloting skills “were likely degraded from his use of the drug before the accident” and that he was likely experiencing the effects of withdrawal, including “significant mood alteration and degradation, craving for the drug, and post-cocaine-induced fatigue” (p. 29). The findings demonstrate that even hours after someone has consumed drugs and the drugs subsequently metabolized, performance can be degraded. Other accidents have also shown the adverse effects of illegal drug con- consumption on operator performance. For example, in the 1991 train acci- dent discussed in Chapter 4, in which two freight locomotives had passed a stop signal and inappropriately entered a track reserved for a passenger train, investigators determined that shortly before the accident, the engineer and brakeman had ingested marijuana while operating the locomotives. 90 Investigators concluded that they proceeded beyond the stop signal because they were impaired from the effects of their marijuana consumption. As with alcohol, high levels of a drug or its metabolites may indicate that the operator is a drug abuser, that is, a long-term user of a drug or a drug addict. If an operator is suspected of abusing medications, pharmacy records of prescribed medications may reveal a pattern of use over time. The operator may have approached several physicians and obtained prescriptions from each. The operator also may not have informed his or her employer of either the medication use or the condition for which the medications were prescribed. Other information, such as records of convictions for driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, may also suggest a pattern of substance abuse (see also Chapter 12). In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration requires pilots to report such infractions and reviews the driving records of all pilots to learn of such offenses, regardless of their self-reports (McFadden, 1997). A substance abuse specialist evaluates all pilots with two or more convictions (and some with one) to determine whether they are chemically dependent. Only after these specialists have reviewed the operator’s history and concluded that he or she would likely refrain from future drug or chemical use does it grant the medical certificate needed to serve as a pilot. Company-maintained personnel records may contain information reflecting an operator’s history of substance use. Prolonged absences, or absences at the beginning and end of work weeks or work periods, may indicate chemical use. Performance appraisals may also show marked changes in work habits or work performance—another indicator of chemical dependency (see Chapter 12). Depending on the industry, regulators may require operators to provide the results of regular medical examinations and their medication use. These records should provide investigators with considerable information regarding medical and pharmaceutical antecedents to error. Specific Impairment Many of the tasks that operators perform require acute vision or hearing or subtle senses of touch. Impairment in any of these sensory modalities may lead to errors. Operators in most complex systems are expected to demonstrate sufficient visual acuity to read displays from their control stations, see motion and depth, and distinguish among colors both within and outside of the immediate environment. They should also be able to demonstrate ­ sufficient aural acuity to identify various alerts, recognize electronic and voice communications and other system-related sounds, and determine the direction from which the sounds originated. Yet, operators may not always recognize their own impairment, and even when they do, they may deliberately withhold that information if they believe that reporting the impairment could adversely affect their careers. Investigators acknowledged this in 1996 when a passenger train operator 91 failed to stop the train he was operating at a red stop signal. His train struck another train ahead, killing him and injuring more than 150 passengers (National Transportation Safety Board, 1997a). Investigators learned that for almost 10 years, the operator had been treated for diabetes and that he had undergone corrective surgery for diabetic retinopathy, an eye disease brought on by diabetes. They attributed his failure to stop to impaired vision; he was unable to distinguish the signal colors. Although required to do so, he did not inform his supervisors of his medical condition, and despite the impairment, he continued to serve as a train operator. Depending on the complex system and the sensory modality involved, impairment may be so subtle that neither operators nor their supervisors recognize it, becoming evident only in unusual or unexpected conditions. Investigators encountered this in an investigation of a 1996 air transport aircraft accident in which the captain, who was attempting to land at New York’s LaGuardia Airport, lost depth perception on landing, substantially damaging the airplane, although all on board escaped serious injury (National Transportation Safety Board, 1997b). The captain had been intermittently wearing monovision contact lenses for several years without incident, lenses that corrected near vision in one and distant vision in the other eye simultaneously. However, in certain visual conditions, the differences in the contact lenses degraded his depth perception. The final moments of the flight path had been over water and through fog, conditions that obscured background features until just above the runway. The reduced visual cues in the prevailing visual conditions, with the adverse effects of the monovision lenses, sufficiently reduced his depth perception to the point that he allowed the aircraft to descend too low and strike the runway. Behavioral Antecedents Behavioral antecedents, which develop from the operator’s near- or long-term experiences, can adversely affect performance. They can, for example, follow profoundly stressful events, such as the loss of an immediate family member. The grief and stress of people in these situations and the effects of that stress on their performance are understandable. Many have encountered the effects of behavioral antecedents at one time or another and can attest to their adverse influence. The effects they exert on the performance of an operator in question, however, may be different from that on another’s performance. Two behavioral antecedents, fatigue, and stress, are of particular interest to error investigators. Others that are company-influenced may also be important in terms of focusing on operator antecedents. 92 The Company’s Role Because of the role of the company in the conduct of its operations, antecedents that may appear to be related to the operator may be more correctly attributed to the company. Operators may commit errors because of skill or knowledge deficiencies, and these deficiencies may serve as the antecedents to the errors in question. However, companies that employ the operators establish minimum qualification levels, hire applicants whom they believe will meet those qualifications, and train and certify them as qualified to safely operate their systems. Consequently, because of a company’s role in overseeing its operations, company antecedents and not operator antecedents may influence errors that result from a lack of operator knowledge or skills. Companies may also be considered to have influenced operator performance if company-established work schedules led to operator fatigue. If, however, operators engaged in personal activities that led to their fatigue, then the company would not be considered the source of the fatigue and the antecedent to error. This will be discussed more fully in Chapter 6. Fatigue Fatigue and its adverse effects on human performance have been studied extensively (e.g., Costa, 1998; Gander et al., 1998; Mitler and Miller, 1996; Rosekind et al., 1994). The research shows that fatigue degrades human per- formance and can contribute to or cause error. Dawson and Reid (1997a, b) found that those who had been awake as long as 18–27 hours continuously exhibited cognitive performance decrements that were equivalent to having a BAC of 5% or greater. In a study of accidents in several transportation modes, the National Transportation Safety Board examined the role of fatigue in transporta- tion safety (National Transportation Safety Board, 1999). As investigators conclude, Researchers have studied factors that affect fatigue, such as duration and quality of sleep, shiftwork and work schedules, circadian rhythms, and time of day. Cumulative sleep loss and circadian disruption can lead to a physiological state characterized by impaired performance and dimin- ished alertness. Fatigue can impair information processing and reaction time, increasing the probability of errors and ultimately leading to trans- portation accidents. (pp. 5 and 6) The importance of the effects of fatigue on cognitive performance of opera- tors, and their effectiveness in complex system operations, has increased as technology has advanced. As Fletcher et al. (2015) write, The nature of work-related fatigue has changed over time. For example, in predominantly agricultural times, work tended to be mostly physical 93 and fatigue was therefore likely to be largely physical in nature. After industrialization, work in many settings became repetitive and fatigue increasingly included psychological or cognitive components from ­ factors such as time on task. When electricity became widely available and night work more common, sleep and circadian factors underlying fatigue became prominent. (p. 7) Fatigued operators can have particularly adverse influence on system safety as is evident from a substantial body of literature, albeit primarily focusing on highway drivers. Teran-Santos et al. (1999) found that drivers with untreated obstructive sleep apnea were more likely to be involved in highway accidents than comparable drivers who did not have the condition, after controlling for pre-accident alcohol and drug use, among other factors. Williamson et al. (2011) identified a link between fatigued performance and highway accidents, errors among hospital staff, and workplace injuries such as on construction sites. Investigators determined that fatigue led pilots of a DC-8 cargo flight to commit critical errors in a 1993 accident at the United States Naval Air Station in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in which the crew allowed the airplane to turn too steeply and strike the ground just before landing (National Transportation Safety Board, 1994). The three pilots had been sleep-deprived at the time of the accident. The captain had received only 5 hours of sleep in the previous 48 hours and had been awake for 23.5 hours at the time of the accident. The first officer had been awake for 19 hours continuously and had gotten only 10 hours of sleep in the 57 hours before the accident. In general, fatigue results from sleep loss in a 24-hour period, accumulated sleep loss over several days, disrupted circadian rhythms, and extended time performing a task. Most people need about 8 hours of sleep daily, give or take 1 hour. Thus, those who receive less 7 hours of sleep in any 24-hour period, or even 8 hours if they are typically need 9 hours of sleep, will likely be fatigued. The greater the difference between the number of hours a per- son needs to sleep and the amount that person obtained in the preceding 24 hours, the more likely that person will be acutely fatigued. People can be chronically fatigued from accumulating a sleep debt, that is, not getting the amount of sleep needed to be rested, over several days. Again, assuming that most people need 8 hours of sleep nightly, those sleep- ing 6 hours a night or less for a week will likely be chronically fatigued by the end of the week, as any parent of an infant can attest. Most people maintain regular activity schedules and they tend to get tired and hungry about the same time each day. When their schedules are dis- rupted, for example, by transoceanic air travel or by shifting work schedules, they will have difficulty sleeping during the “new” night, what had been the day in the “old” time zone, no matter how fatigued they are. Several hours later, during the day in the “new” time zone, they may be unable to remain alert, despite coffee, tea, exercise, or other technique that had otherwise been 94 effective in restoring alertness. Thereafter, they may experience similar sleep disturbances upon their return, when they must readjust to the “old” time zone after having become acclimated to the “new” one. Many physiological and behavioral functions, including sleep cycle, diges- tion, hormonal activity, and body temperature, are regulated in approximate 24-hour cycles. Disrupting these functions, as occurs to transoceanic airline travelers and shift workers who work days one week and nights the next, is also fatiguing because the change in schedules is more rapid than is the body’s ability to adjust. The experience is known as circadian desynchrono- sis, popularly referred to as “jet lag.” Circadian desynchronosis makes it difficult for people to sleep when they would otherwise be awake, and to be awake and alert during times when they had been asleep. Disrupted circadian rhythms lead to chronic fatigue, until the body adjusts to the new schedule and the person receives sufficient rest to compensate for the sleep deficits (e.g., Tilley et al., 1982). Because circa- dian rhythms do not adjust rapidly, a person whose circadian rhythms have been disrupted may be fatigued for days afterward, depending on the extent of the difference between the previous and current schedules. Therefore, although it may be early afternoon local time, a period in which operators would otherwise be alert, operators experiencing circadian desynchronosis may still be performing as if it were 3:00 a.m. Dawson and Fletcher (2001) and Fletcher and Dawson (2001), studied the effects of circadian desynchro- nosis on employee performance, and developed a scheduling model, which considers circadian effects, to schedule duty times of shift workers or trans- oceanic workers to minimize their disruptive effects. They found that con- sidering circadian factors in scheduling worker’s activities can reduce the effects of circadian disruptions. Certain medical conditions and medications can also be fatiguing. Sallinen and Hublin (2015) noted that sleep disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea, and pain-related conditions, are fatiguing. Untreated sleep apnea, a condition caused by blockage of a person’s airways while sleeping, results in numerous awakenings, of which the person may be unaware, because of the inability to breathe. Akerstedt et al. (2011), noted that about 5% of the adult general population has sleep apnea, about 5%–10% has ­ restless leg syndrome, and about 3.9% has periodic limb movement, all medical condi- tions that lead to fatigue. In addition, prescribed medications used to treat restless leg syndrome, pain, anxiety, and insomnia, among others, are either fatiguing or lead to decrements in cognitive performance that resemble that of fatigue. Further, the quality of sleep is not constant; people sleep most deeply between 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. in their local time zones. They also experi- ence an equivalent decrease in alertness 12 hours later, between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. local time. With these phased changes in sleep quality, the like- lihood of committing errors also changes. Monk et al. (1996) found that the number of errors committed in a variety of performance measures, errors 95 that can be directly related to operator performance and to accidents, var- ies with the time of day. In a study of on-the job injuries in several factories, Smith et al. (1994) found that night shift workers were injured on the job sig- nificantly more often than were day shift workers who performed the same tasks for the same employers. The evidence demonstrates that time of day can affect performance, and the times in which operators are most likely to commit errors occur when they would otherwise be in their deepest sleep cycles, between 3:00 and 5:00 a.m., and the afternoon correlate of those hours, between 3:00 and 5:00 p.m. Alertness is critical to error-free performance in complex systems and fatigue has been demonstrated to degrade operator performance in those cognitive skills that are most needed for operator effectiveness. Gunzelmann et al. (2011) and Lim and Dinges (2008) showed that fatigued individuals have difficulty with sustained attention. Lim and Dinges (2010) found that the cognitive responses of fatigued individuals slowed, that is, they took longer to notice environmental and situational features over that of non-fatigued ones. Akerstedt (2007) found that critical aspects of cognitive performance, such as vigilance, memory, and reaction time, among others, were worse among fatigued individuals than it was for those who were adequately rested. Wickens et al. (2015) observed that complex cognitive performance, such as mental arithmetic and critical reasoning, declined with extended sleep deprivation. Performance decrements were found to be worst during subjects’ circadian lows. Causes of Fatigue For our purposes, fatigue results from operator-related antecedents or orga- nization- or regulator-related antecedents. Medical conditions that the oper- ator is aware of but does not report to his or her company or the regulator, if required to do so, are an example of a type of operator-related antecedent. However, if the company or the regulator is aware (or should be aware) of the adverse influence of fatigue on cognitive performance and does not require operators with sleep apnea or other medical condition to be diagnosed and treated for the condition, then the antecedent would be considered company- or regulator-related. As information about the deleterious effects of fatigue and fatiguing medical conditions has increased, companies and regulators have increased their role in requiring those in safety-sensitive positions with these conditions to be diagnosed and treated for the conditions. Otherwise, operators who, for example, are fatigued because they remained awake longer than they had planned to before going on duty, would be con- sidered to be responsible for the antecedents. If they did so in order to watch a film or an event on television, for example, this would almost be considered a violation rather than an error antecedent. However, if they had insufficient sleep for reasons that had little to do with their volition, such as infant care or brief illness, they deserve more consideration, but nevertheless, must be 96 considered to be the source of the antecedent if they were fatigued as a result of their situations, and did not alert their supervisors to that effect. Companies and organizations can be responsible for the antecedents of an operator’s fatigue if, as noted, they did not require their operators to be treated for fatigue-inducing medical conditions, prohibit their use of impair- ing over-the-counter and prescribed medications, or if they created fatiguing work schedules. As Fletcher et al. (2015) note, the nature of complex systems today calls for 24-hour operations. These systems are simply too expensive, and the societal costs of their nonoperation is too high, to allow them to cease operations for any length of time. Internationally operating aircraft and vessels, nuclear power stations, and chemical refineries, for example, cannot avoid nighttime operations without causing significant disruption to themselves and to society in general. Investigating Fatigue Unlike medical conditions, where medical records describe diagnoses, or alcohol-related impairment, where blood alcohol level provides evidence of the degree of intoxication, fatigue is a particularly challenging metric to assess. As Price and Coury observe, “historically, fatigue has been notori- ously difficult to define and operationalize” (2015, p. 86). Because no physi- cal measure of fatigue can be taken, investigators must assess the degree of fatigue indirectly. They do this by assessing evidence for fatigue, relating it to the type of error the operator committed, and determining the likeli- hood of other antecedents accounting for the error (Price and Coury, 2015; Strauch, 2015). Investigators determine that an operator’s error was the result of fatigue by first establishing that the operator was fatigued. Medical records that demonstrate that an operator has an untreated, fatigue-producing medi- cal condition, would be sufficient to establish that he or she was fatigued. Similarly, evidence of the use of a sedating medication would also be suf- ficient. Absent such evidence, investigators establish the presence of fatigue by examining the quantity, regularity, and quality of the operator’s sleep in the period before the accident. Ideally, a week’s worth of sleep/awake times would establish beyond question the quantity and regularity of someone’s sleep, but most people have difficulty remembering more than a few days previously what times they went to bed and what time they arose. Therefore, investigators typically ask operators to note their sleep/wake times for 72–96 hours before an accident. This record will establish whether an operator was subject to circadian disruption, and whether he or she got the desired 8 hours, plus or minus 1 hour, of sleep. Irregularity in sleep schedules, and sleep times less than the person’s regular sleep hours serve as evidence of fatigue. Obviously, the greater the deficit from 8 hours, the greater the irreg- ularity in sleep/wake times, and the greater the cumulative deficit over time, the more likely the operator was fatigued. In addition, Price and Coury (2015) 97 highlight the importance of documenting sleep quality. An operator who has accrued sufficient sleep (i.e., around 8 hours), with regularity in the time before an accident, but whose sleep was diminished by noise, interruptions, high temperature, and so on, will be considered to have received insufficient quality sleep and hence, to have been fatigued. Once an operator has been identified as having been fatigued at the time of the accident, investigators then determine whether the error or errors were consistent with someone who was fatigued. In general, we look for cogni- tive errors in which the operator misdiagnosed something, or was late in doing a previously completed task, that is, was late or improperly performed a cognitive task that he or she had completed effectively beforehand. For example, failure to properly diagnose something, whether a component fail- ure or a navigation error, can be the result of any of several factors. A person who is fatigued, however, will likely have difficulty shifting attention among possible explanations or components, while focusing excessively on a single item. Because proper diagnosis requires an understanding of a system and its subsystem operations, effectively understanding the nature of a malfunc- tion within the system calls for the operator to rapidly examine the system and recognize the symptoms of the malfunction. Because cognitive activity is slowed when someone is fatigued, evidence of such slowing in cognitive performance would be consistent with someone who is fatigued. Similarly, someone who fails to quickly recognize a change in situational cues, or who is late is performing a task because he or she was late to recognize the need to perform the task, would provide evidence of being fatigued. On the other hand, action errors are typically not related to fatigue. Someone who turns on one switch while intending to activate another, adjacent one, has commit- ted an error that may or may not be influenced by fatigue. Because the types of cognitive errors prone to fatigue can also be affected by other antecedents, it is necessary to exclude other potential antecedents that could also account for an error to determine conclusively that fatigue led to an error. These include shortcomings in training, oversight, selection, and procedures. For example, an operator who misdiagnosed the cause of a component failure may have lacked the knowledge of the component and its relationship to the system to enable him or her to effectively understand its cause. This lack of knowledge must be excluded as a potential error ante- cedent, along with other antecedents that can explain the misdiagnosis in order to identify fatigue as the error’s antecedent. Only when all potential antecedents of the error have been ruled out, and fatigue is the only plausible antecedent remaining, can one confidently identify the operator’s fatigue as the antecedent of the error in question. Preventing Fatigue As noted, the cause of an operator’s fatigue may lie either with the opera- tor himself or herself, or with the company or regulator. In either instance, 98 companies or regulators can or have undertaken rule changes, scheduling changes, and education activities, among others, to mitigate opportunities for operators to oversee system operations when fatigued (e.g., see Gander, 2015). For example, after a 2009 airplane accident that killed all 49 passengers and crew onboard and one person on the ground (National Transportation Safety Board, 2010), the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration changed its hours of service rules for pilots to account for duty time served during pilots’ circadian lows, that is, times when they would have ordinarily have been asleep. Pilots who worked a period of time that would ordinarily not have been fatiguing, were required to have additional rest hours if that duty time was served at night (FAA regulation 14 code of federal regulations Parts 1–27). Many regulators of complex systems require operators to accrue sufficient rest after their duty periods, but few account for changes in the schedules of their duty periods, or for rapid transmeridian time zone changes, as is the case with long-haul transport pilots. Consequently, the rules may allow operators to accrue what would otherwise be adequate rest periods, but because of potential shift changes that lead to circadian disruption, for example, shifting from day shift to night shift, the operator will likely be fatigued in the immediate nights following the schedule change, as the body takes several days to adjust the circadian rhythms to such dramatic changes. The Federal Aviation Administration, in its revised hours of service rules, encouraged airlines to adopt fatigue risk management systems, which it explained is “a data-driven process and a systematic method used to con- tinuously monitor and manage safety risks associated with fatigue-related error” (14. code of federal regulations 171.3). Fatigue risk management systems allow companies the flexibility to develop schedules of work that address the unique risks of their own operations, based on data that the company must collect and ana- lyze. Researchers have described the benefits of such programs (e.g., Dawson et al., 2012; Fletcher et al., 2015), and implementing a fatigue risk manage- ment system or similar program that identifies and addresses the risks of operators being fatigued while on duty can reduce, if not eliminate, the role of the company or regulator as an antecedent of an operator’s fatigue-related error. Stress The effects of stress on performance have been studied extensively. Definitions of stress vary, but the definition by Salas et al. (1996) will be used presently. They define stress as, “a process by which certain environmental demands evoke an appraisal process in which perceived demand exceeds resources and results in undesirable physiological, psychological, behavioral or social outcomes” (p. 6). The effects of individual stressors depend largely on the person and how stressful he or she perceives them. Stressors that are perceived to be 99 moderate can enhance performance by counteracting the effects of boredom or tedium in settings in which little changes (Hancock and Warm, 1989). However, stressors considered severe can degrade performance. Person-Related Stress Personal stress, influenced by circumstances unrelated to an operator’s job that cause “undesirable physiological, psychological, behavioral or social outcomes,” are differentiated from system-induced stress. Operators may encounter more than one stressor simultaneously, both person- and system- related, and their performance may be affected by both. The more stress- ors a person experiences, the more likely that person’s performance will be degraded by their effects. Person-related stressors include marital breakups, the illness or death of family members, or disruptions to routines such as a move or the depar- ture of a household member. The effects of personal stress on an opera- tor’s performance can be seen in a marine accident that occurred when a tugboat pushing a barge on the Delaware River, in Philadelphia, ran over a tour vessel (National Transportation Safety Board, 2011). Two of the pas- sengers on the tour vessel were killed in the accident. The operator of the tug/barge, the mate, was unable to see the tour vessel because he was using his cellphone and laptop computer, from a lower level wheelhouse, while operating the vessel. As investigators describe, the mate, who was operating the tug/barge, had told a company official after the accident that … “he had been ‘consumed’ with dealing with this family crisis; medical records obtained by the National Transportation Safety Board confirmed that the mate’s child, who was undergoing a scheduled routine medical procedure that day, had suffered a potentially life-threatening complication less than an hour before the mate went on duty.” (p. 17) Investigators held him responsible for causing the accident, but it is nonetheless likely that the stress of learning of his son’s life-threatening condition affected his ability to recognize that he needed to inform company supervisors that he could not safely operate the vessel because of the stress that he was experiencing. Instead of properly operating the vessel, he was below a deck that would have enabled him to view the vessel’s forward path, and was talking on his cell phone and using his laptop, presumably to obtain more information about his son’s condition. Person-related stressors may not necessarily be negative; they can result from what most consider happy occasions. Alcov et al. (1982) compared the accident rates of U.S. Navy pilots who had experienced stressful life events to those who had not, events that included marital problems, major career decisions, relationship difficulties, job-related problems, as well as impend- ing marriage and recent child birth in the immediate family. Pilots who had experienced stressful events had sustained higher accident rates than pilots who had not. Despite these findings, it is important to recognize that the 100 mere presence of person-related stressors does not imply that an operator’s performance was adversely affected by stress because of the noted individ- ual variations in reaction to stressors. System-Induced Stress Operators may find unexpected system events to be stressful, such as dis- plays with information that cannot be interpreted, unexpected aural warn- ings, and controls that appear to be ineffective. Operator reaction to these stressors is influenced by their experiences and previous encounters with similar events. Operator actions can also lead to stress, particularly if severe consequences might result. The more adverse the consequences, the greater the stress the operator can be expected to experience when encountering that event. Case Study On February 12, 2009, a Bombardier DHC-8-400, on a flight from Newark, New Jersey, to Buffalo, New York, crashed into a residence near Buffalo, while the airplane was on its final approach to the airport. All 49 passengers and crew onboard the airplane and one person on the ground were killed in the accident (National Transportation Safety Board, 2010). Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and nothing untoward was found wrong with the airplane. Investigators concluded that the captain had inappropriately responded to a stick shaker alert, which occurs when an airplane is about to stall. Rather than lowering the nose and advanc- ing power, as he had been trained to do, he pulled the nose back and the airplane entered a stall, from which neither the captain nor the first officer were able to recover. Investigators found that neither the captain nor first officer had effectively monitored the airspeed before the stick shaker had alerted them. The error in failing to react appropriately to a stick shaker is one that is not wholly consistent with fatigue, given the training that the pilots receive. That is, all pilots are trained and are required to demonstrate their recogni- tion of, and appropriate response to a stall. The stick shaker alert, in which the control column rapidly moves forward and aft and is accompanied by a unique sound, is designed to minimize the time pilots need to recognize the impending stall. Both auditory and tactile cues that are unique to this impending aerodynamic condition are provided and both are readily identi- fiable. The criticality of rapid recognition and the need for an effective crew response to the warnings of an impending stall led to the requirement for a unique and quickly recognized alert. Consequently, little, if any, diagnosis is 101 needed to recognize the nature of a stick shaker alert. However, allowing the airplane to approach a stall by failing to monitor the airspeed is an error con- sistent with fatigue because a proper approach to landing calls for pilots to rapidly shift their monitoring among parameters of airspeed, descent speed, engine power, and lateral and vertical flight paths. However, shifting atten- tion, vigilance, and monitoring are cognitive skills that have been demon- strated to be adversely affected by fatigue. Neither pilot resided in the city from which the flight originated, and both had “commuted” or flew as a passenger from their residence to Newark. The captain arrived at Newark 3 days before the day of the accident, arriv- ing there in the evening, at 20:05, and began a 2-day trip of flights the next morning. He spent the night before the 2-day trip in the crew room at the airport and awoke before he was required to report for duty at 05:30 the next morning and again the following morning, the day of the accident. In between, he spent the night at a company-paid hotel. The night before the accident, with a 21-hour and 16-minute rest period upon completion of his 2-day trip, he spent the night in the crew room at the airport. Investigators found that 03:10 and again at 07:26 on the morning of the accident he had logged onto the airline’s computer. He reported for duty the day of the acci- dent at 13:30. The first officer flew from her home on the west coast of the United States to Newark, changing planes in Memphis. The flight originated in Seattle at 19:51 local (Pacific) time or 22:51 eastern time and arrived in Memphis at 23:30 Pacific time or 02:30 eastern time. She then took a flight that left Memphis at 04:18 eastern time and arrived at Newark about 06:23, eastern time. She then rested in the crew room from about 07:32 to about 13:05 when she sent a text message from her computer. The flight crews of the flights on which she flew to Newark reported that she slept about 90 minutes on the first flight and for the duration of the second. Airport crew rooms are provided to pilots and flight attendants to enable them to relax before their flights. Little privacy is available and, while couches may be provided, these are not designed for crew sleep- ing because the room lights are typically bright and there is little effort to soften the volume of noise. Crewmembers meet each other and typi- cally converse before their flights. Therefore, pilots who spend the night in airport crew rooms may obtain sufficient sleep to be considered rested, but the quality of sleep obtained would negate potential benefits of suf- ficient hours of sleep, if it were possible for crewmembers to sleep the entirety of their stays in crew rooms. As a result, investigators concluded, “the ­ captain had experienced chronic sleep loss, and both he and the first officer had experienced interrupted and poor-quality sleep during the 24 hours before the accident” (National Transportation Safety Board, 2010, p. 106). Crew rooms do not charge crewmembers fees for their use, unlike hotel rooms. Regional air pilots, especially first officers, may not earn enough 102 compensation to be able to afford hotel rooms. Moreover, while regulator hours of service dictate the number of hours and rest pilots much obtain while on duty, the rules do not apply to hours served off duty, as the captain and first officer were on the night before the accident. The quality of sleep the pilots obtained in the crew room allowed investi- gators to determine that they were fatigued at the time. However, the error of not recognizing and responding to the impending aerodynamic stall, as noted, was not one consistent with fatigue. In this case, the captain had a record of previous errors in training consistent with the one that led to the accident. Simply put, his record was such that such an error was consistent with the quality of his performance as a pilot when faced with unusual or unexpected events. The first officer, by contrast, had no such record of per- formance deficiencies. Although investigators determined that the crew was fatigued at the time, the lack of correspondence between fatigue and the error of not recognizing and responding appropriately to a stick shaker, and the presence of an alternative antecedent to error, that is, the captain’s poor performance record, prevented them from attributing the critical crew error to fatigue. As they concluded, Evidence suggests that both pilots were likely experiencing some degree of fatigue at the time of the accident. However, the errors and decisions made by the pilots cannot be solely attributed to fatigue because of other explanations for their performance…The captain’s errors during the flight could be consistent with his pattern of performance failures during testing, which he had experienced throughout his flying career. (National Transportation Safety Board, 2010, p. 107) Summary Two general categories of operator antecedents, behavioral and physiologi- cal, can lead to error. Physiological antecedents can impair performance either temporarily or permanently, through disease, medications, or alcohol or over-the-counter or illicit drugs. These can temporarily impair operators by altering perception, slowing reaction time, and causing fatigue, among other adverse effects. Behavioral antecedents to error include fatigue and stress, originating from the operator’s personal experiences or from company actions. Long work schedules, changing shift work schedules, abrupt change in time zones, or a combination of these, are company actions that can cause fatigue, well-documented antecedents to error. Stress can be caused by factors related to the job, or events in an operator’s personal life that are indepen- dent of the job. DOCUMENTING OPERATOR ANTECEDENTS MEDICAL CONDITIONS • Review operator medical records, both company maintained and those maintained by a personal health care provider, with a health care professional. • Note recent diagnoses of and treatment for medical conditions, and determine the possible effects of the conditions and associ- ated medication on operator performance, in consultation with an occupational health expert. • Interview colleagues, associates, relatives of the operator, and the operator if possible, to determine if he or she was experi- encing even a mild illness or temporary discomfort at the time of the event. • Interview operator family and colleagues to determine if they noted changes in the operator’s daily routines, behaviors, or attitudes, and when these changes were first observed. • Review company personnel records to detect changes in work habits, job performance, and attendance. DRUGS OR ALCOHOL • Request, as soon as possible after the occurrence, a blood sam- ple from the operator, or from the pathologist if the operator was killed, for a toxicological analysis. • Ask local law enforcement authorities to recommend a ­ reputable and qualified laboratory that can conduct toxicological analy- ses if local government laboratories are unable to do so. • Review positive toxicological findings with an occupational health specialist, another toxicologist, or health care provider with the necessary expertise. Ask him or her to obtain and review the results of controlled studies on the medications in question. • Give the toxicologist information about the care of the body or the specimen if the operator has been killed, the state of the operator’s health before the event, and possible medication that the operator may have been taking. • Consult a physician, pharmacist, toxicologist, or a pharmacolo- gist to learn about the effects of single or multiple drugs on operator performance when evidence confirms that an opera- tor took medications before an occurrence. FATIGUE • Document the time at which the operator went to sleep and awoke with the previous 3–4 days before an accident. • Determine from medical records and prescription drug records or a toxicological sample, if possible, if the operator had an untreated sleep disorder or other fatiguing medical conditions, or had taken sedating medications. • Assess fatigue from either an untreated sleep disorder, other fatiguing medical conditions, or the use of a sedating medication. • Characterize those who receive 4 or more hours less sleep than typical in a 24-hour as acutely fatigued and those who receive 2 hours less sleep than usual over four 24-hour periods to be chronically fatigued. • Reconstruct the times the operator went to sleep and the times the person awoke for each of the days since the travel com- menced, using the home time zone as the standard for those who have traveled across time zones. • If the operator had traveled before the accident, note the num- ber of days that the traveler was away from the base schedule, and the number of days since the traveler returned to the base schedule. • Document the time of the accident to determine whether it occurred between 3:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. local time. • Identify characteristics of fatigue in the critical errors, includ- ing preoccupation with a single task, slowed reaction time, and difficulty performing tasks that had been performed effec- tively before. • Assess fatigue, if not medical or medication-related, from an irregular sleep/wake schedule in the days before the accident, or insufficient rest in that period. • Determine if the error the operator made was a cognitive one, and if so, whether it was consistent with a fatigue-related error. • Exclude other potential error antecedents such as training short- comings, inadequate oversight, or a record of poor performance. AUTOPSIES • If the operator was killed in the accident, and his or her ­ medical condition is unknown, arrange for an autopsy by a forensic pathologist if possible, or one with additional training and experience in accident investigations. • Give the pathologist information on the nature of the accident, the state of the body, the role of the operator at the time, the nature of the machinery with which the operator was interact- ing, and data obtained from medical records, peer interviews, and other sources. • Provide the pathologist with photos of the operator’s body and of the accident site. • Ask the pathologist for information on preexisting physiologi- cal conditions, the effects of impact forces, (if in a vehicle or other dynamic environment) thermal injuries, or toxic fumes, and the presence of corrective lenses, hearing aids, or other supplemental devices on the body of the operator. STRESS • Interview family and colleagues to determine whether the operator experienced stressors before the event, and how he or she reacted to them. 6 The Company The Japanese nuclear accident three weeks ago occurred largely because managers counted on workers to follow rules but never explained why the rules were important. Wald, 1999 New York Times Introduction A company’s role in creating antecedents to error has been increasingly recognized. The New York Times account of the 1999 accident at a Japanese uranium processing plant suggests that the operator errors that led to the accident were a direct result of management actions and decisions. A subse- quent New York Times article revealed that plant managers compounded the effects of their initial actions by not developing an emergency plan in the event of an incident (French, 1999). Apparently, the managers believed that an accident could not occur and therefore, none was needed. This chapter will address how companies can create antecedents to error in the systems that they oversee and operate. Organizations Companies operating complex systems can influence the safety of those sys- tems in many ways. They hire and train the operators, establish operating rules and maintenance schedules and practices, and they oversee compli- ance with these rules, schedules, and procedures, among other activities. Shortcomings in any of these areas have the potential to create error ante- cedents, and companies are ultimately responsible for ensuring that their actions minimize the role of potential antecedents, so that the systems they operate do so safely. 110 Hiring Companies hire the individuals who operate their systems. In doing so, the standards they use can have considerable influence on the safety of system operations. Selecting operators who may not be effective will not only be expensive in training costs, but it can enhance the likelihood of subsequent errors occurring as well. Companies generally consider several factors when selecting candidates for operator positions. These include requisite skills and knowledge, predicted performance as operators, and the number of operators needed to oversee system operations. Skills, Knowledge, and Predicted Performance Companies are expected to identify the knowledge and skills their person- nel need to effectively operate systems. They apply these to their hiring stan- dards to enable them to identify applicants likely to perform the required tasks safely and those applicants predicted to commit a disproportionate number of errors. For example, maintenance technicians would be expected to perform one or more of the following tasks, • Read and understand maintenance manuals • Understand the structural and mechanical relationships among components and subsystems • Apply instructions to tasks • Identify and locate appropriate components and tools • Diagnose and correct mechanical malfunctions • Recognize when the tasks have been completed • Complete written documentation • Describe, either orally or in writing, the maintenance actions taken • Verify that the intent of the maintenance instructions had been car- ried out Deficiencies in performing any of these tasks could lead to errors. The more critical skills an applicant can perform, the more effective the appli- cant will likely be as an operator, and the fewer the errors he or she will be expected to commit. It is a company’s responsibility to ensure that those it hires as maintenance technicians, for example, can do so competently, either upon hiring or after completing a training program. Selecting a person for a position of responsibility without the requisite training to enable that person to perform acceptably creates an antecedent to error. Companies have also created error antecedents by selecting operators based on skills or experience that may not necessarily relate to those actually 111 needed for system operations. For example, because interpersonal skills are critical to the effectiveness of operator teams, companies need to consider these skills among their selection criteria, skills that may not always be effec- tively assessed through company selection criteria. Members of operator teams possessing deficient interpersonal skills may commit errors, or con- tribute to the errors of others. In industries in which the regulators establish operator-licensing criteria, companies apply them as minimum selection standards, limiting but not eliminating their ability to implement their own selection standards. In the event that investigators identify deficiencies in the skills of licensed opera- tors, they need to focus on both the regulator’s licensing standards and the company’s hiring criteria to identify antecedents to error. The Number of Operators The number of operators interacting with a system, whether too many, too few, or optimum, affects the quality of individual and team performance and system safety. Paris, Salas, and Cannon-Bowers (1999) believe that an insufficient number of operators can create excessive operator stress because of the resultant increased individual workload. However, hiring too many operators is wasteful and can create low individual workload, which can lead to operator boredom and inattention, both potential antecedents to error (e.g., O’Hanlon, 1981). Designers, regulators, companies, or operators themselves may establish the minimum number of persons needed to operate systems. In aviation, reg- ulators require at least two pilots to operate air transport aircraft, even if only one is needed to effectively control the airplane. Companies in other systems may have more discretion in determining the number of operators they need. They may base the decision on the nature of the tasks, the degree of difficulty in performing the tasks, the amount of time available to complete them, or even on existing agreements with labor organizations. For example, when scheduling maintenance tasks, companies may want to return the equipment to service quickly and may assign more operators than usual to the task. In some systems, operator activity during different system operating phases varies and as a result, additional operators may be needed more in certain operating phases than at other times. Some companies determine the number of operators they need based on an “average” workload level. In other systems, where individual workload varies according to the system operating phase, companies may match the number of operators to the num- ber needed by the operating phases. During periods of high workload, they may add operators to match the workload and likewise, they may reduce the number needed during low workload periods. For example, air traffic con- trol sectors or airspace segments are often combined at night when air traffic activity is typically light, thereby reducing the number of controllers needed during those low activity periods. 112 Researchers have studied methods of determining the number of opera- tors needed to operate safely. Lee, Forsythe, and Rothblum (2000) developed a mechanism to determine the appropriate number of operators needed in one complex system, commercial shipping. They incorporated factors such as phase of voyage (open waters, restricted waters, and in port), port call fre- quency, level of shore-based maintenance support, and applicable work/rest standards into their analysis. The number of crewmembers needed varied considerably with changes in these factors, factors that would have different weights according to the particular system and its operating environment. Training In general, operator performance deficiencies are more likely to result from deficiencies in company training than from deficiencies in hiring. Training programs significantly affect the ability of companies to reduce error oppor- tunities and decisions made on the type and length of training can influence the potential for errors to occur in system operations. Training in complex system operations generally involves two compo- nents. One, initial training, designed to convey the overall knowledge and skills necessary to effectively operate the systems, is administered to newly hired operators and two, ongoing training (or recurrent training in commer- cial aviation), is designed to maintain the skills and knowledge of existing operators and introduce them to changes in the system or to other safety- related topics. Most companies that operate complex systems employ some type of initial training to introduce newly hired operators to system opera- tions, however, not all conduct ongoing training. Training Content After companies have hired candidates to serve as system operators, they need to provide them with knowledge of the system and its operating proce- dures, and enable them to acquire the skills necessary to operate the system. Some companies employ on-the-job training to accomplish these obj­ ectives. In such training, new employees first observe experienced operators and then, over time, learn to operate the system under their supervision. Other companies use formal training curricula to train new operators. Initial training should describe the system, its components and subsys- tems, their functions, normal and non-normal system states, and general company policies and operating procedures. Initial training can also intro- duce employees to potential system shortcomings. New systems, no matter how thoroughly tested before their introduction to the operating environ- ment, may have difficulties or “bugs” that designers had not anticipated and therefore, not addressed. Although training should not be expected to compensate for design deficiencies, the training environment may be used 113 to introduce operators to potentially unsafe elements of system operation so that they will be familiar with them and, if necessary, respond appropriately should they encounter these elements. Ongoing training is designed to ensure that system operators learn about design changes, new and/or modified operating procedures and regulations, and other pertinent system changes to enable them to continue to perform effectively. Some industries require ongoing training at regular intervals, others schedule it only as needed, and some do not conduct additional train- ing at all. Similar differences can be found among the standards accrediting organizations apply to the certification of professionals in their particular fields (Menges, 1975). Some establish criteria for ongoing training, including the curricula, instructional media, and intervals between training sessions while others establish a minimum number of continuing education credits or courses to be completed within a certain period. Instructional Media Technology has enabled training systems to inform and educate operators in new and innovative ways. For example, simulators can accurately replicate system operating conditions with almost the full range of system character- istics during both expected and unexpected conditions. These allow opera- tors to practice responding in a safe environment free of severe personal consequences to scenarios that would otherwise be too dangerous to practice in actual systems. Despite acquisition costs that can exceed several million dollars (e.g., Moroney and Moroney, 1998) simulators and system training devices have considerably improved operators’ ability to respond effectively to nonroutine operating conditions. Training programs, whether initial or ongoing, may employ various instructional media, including computer-based instruction, CD-ROM, and Internet-based presentations, as well as instructor presentations, and text and written material. Each has particular advantages and disadvantages for students, instructors, and course training coordinators. Some allow more flexibility in a student’s pace of learning and some may offer reduced devel- opment and delivery costs. Some programs combine instructional media, with available instructors to answer questions on specific topics at the stu- dents’ own pace, without disrupting the class or distracting other class members. However, it must be remembered that regardless of the particular medium, instructional media and system training can only deliver instructional mate- rial; they cannot compensate for deficiencies in the material they present. Although the type of instructional medium can influence the quality or pace of learning, the quality of the training program is largely dependent upon the content of the material presented and not the instructional medium delivering it. 114 Costs versus Content Companies strive to maintain effective training programs within budget- ary limitations, yet compromises to balance the competing objectives of high quality with low cost are a fact of corporate life. Companies exercise consid- erable control over the content of their training programs, within the given regulatory standards, and try to keep costs down, recognizing that effective training in complex systems can be so expensive that they may have to make compromises in other areas as a consequence. Reason (1997) suggests that the need to maintain the operations that produce the resources necessary to fund training influences companies to weigh production needs more than nonproduction needs, such as training. Because of the often substantial costs of operator training, managers may devote considerable effort to operator selection to ensure that those hired will successfully complete the training. Some companies even require opera- tors to be fully trained before being considered for selection. High training costs may also produce an unintended result—inducing companies to retain operators whose skills may have deteriorated to avoid the expense of train- ing new operators. Such decisions could create company antecedents to error. The caliber of a company’s training serves as a measure of its commitment to reduce opportunities for error. Those that provide training beyond the minimum that the regulator requires, and that spend additional resources to ensure that their operators are skilled and proficient, can be said to have undertaken positive efforts to reduce opportunities for error. By contrast, companies with training programs that meet only minimum standards may create opportunities for error. Issues such as these, reflecting on corporate culture, will be discussed more later in this chapter. Procedures Complex systems require extensive rules and procedures to guide opera- tors on how to interact with the equipment, and to serve as the final author- ity on how operations are to be conducted. Procedures also guide operators in responding to new or unfamiliar situations, and can help to standard- ize operations across companies and even across international borders. The International Civil Aviation Organization, for example, has established rules governing both air traffic control procedures and aircraft operations across international borders, while its marine counterpart, the International Maritime Organization (IMO), has developed rules and procedures for use in international maritime operations. These two systems, marine and avi- ation, which involve international operations as a matter of routine, have developed and implemented standard procedures to make compliance with rules and procedures across international borders relatively simple. To be effective, operators must perceive procedures to be logical and neces- sary to ensure safe and efficient operations. Otherwise, they may disregard them over time, as reported at the beginning of this chapter—unless their 115 fear of adverse managerial action is sufficient to ensure their compliance. Designers often develop general operating procedures for the systems they design, but companies are ultimately responsible for the procedures they implement, which they can tailor to their own operational needs and require- ments. Companies may modify procedures after they have begun operat- ing the equipment for such reasons as standardizing procedures across the different equipment that they operate, or improving operational efficiency as they gain familiarity and experience with the equipment. Such modifica- tions, in response to lessons learned during system operations, reflect well on a company’s oversight and its efforts to enhance operational safety. General versus Specific Companies face a fundamental dilemma in developing and implementing procedures. Procedures should be sufficiently specific and unambiguous to guide operators in responding to most situations, yet not so specific that operators may feel unable to respond to unexpected situations for which applicable procedures have not yet been developed. As Flach and Rasmussen (2000) note, “it is impossible to have conventions for unconventional events” (p. 170). System safety depends on operators following procedures, yet the oper- ators must still possess the authority to bypass procedures if, given their experience and expertise, they believe that the circumstances so warrant. Explicit procedures provide the guidance operators need to operate systems as intended and ensure that different operators control the system similarly. However, overly restrictive procedures can work against safety. Reason (1997) argues that these may actually encourage operators to develop their own shortcuts, circumventing the intent of the procedures. Overly restrictive or comprehensive procedures also need extensive management oversight to ensure that operators comply with them. Most companies recognize that it is impossible to develop procedures for responses to all possible circum- stances. Ideally, procedures companies develop and implement will be both comprehensive and specific, applying to as many potential circumstances as possible. Oversight Oversight is a critical element of a company’s responsibility for the safety of the system it operates. It is intended to both ensure that operators adhere to the operating procedures, and to inform companies of critical aspects of system operations in need of modification. Oversight serves both to inform operators how to operate the system, and to inform companies how 116 effectively operators are carrying out their procedures, as well as of proce- dural changes that may be needed to ensure continued operational safety. Effective oversight requires obtaining sufficient operator performance data, through frequent and thorough acts of data gathering and inspection, to rec- ognize how well the system is being operated, and to identify changes that may be needed to enhance operational safety. Oversight data should describe employee performance quality in a variety of operating conditions. Many large companies, with thousands of opera- tors, have too large a span of supervision to allow effective oversight of all operators, and they depend on operator performance data for effective over- sight. Effective oversight informs companies about all critical aspects of their operations. Well-informed companies can quickly respond to operational difficulties as they emerge, and thus help to reduce the likelihood that these difficulties can become opportunities for error. The quality of oversight varies according to the system, the operating conditions, the operators, and the severity of the consequences of opera- tor error. Since continuous oversight of operators is unfeasible, companies must maximize the quality of their oversight, through as many of the oper- ating cycles as reasonable, to provide them with sufficient information for a realistic portrayal of the quality of operator performance and procedural quality. Done properly, operational oversight can be effectively carried out by monitoring, recording, and sampling data that is representative of per- formance in the various system operating phases. For example, to deter- mine the extent of taxpayer compliance with the tax code in the United States, the federal government inspects or audits the tax returns of fewer than 5% of taxpayers in a given year. Yet, this sampling of taxpayers reveals that the overwhelming majority of taxpayers comply with the tax laws, despite the low probability that an individual’s returns will be audited. Most taxpayers know that they will receive stiff penalties if convicted of evading tax laws and they are unwilling to face the penalties, irrespective of the low risk of being caught. By sampling a few tax returns the federal government can maintain realistic oversight of taxpayer compliance with tax laws. New Operators Companies need to respond to operator performance deficiencies before their performance can jeopardize system safety. Consequently, operators with manifestly deficient performance are rarely encountered in complex systems; companies tend to address the issue before safety is jeopardized. Organizations that fail to deal with deficient performance can create ante- cedents to error and investigators may occasionally encounter operators with histories of performance deficiencies. Many companies place new operators in probationary periods that give them full discretion to evaluate operator performance, and retain or 117 discharge operators in these periods. Effective oversight requires companies to identify and address performance shortcomings that their operators may demonstrate at any time during their employment, but companies should pay especial attention to employees who may have difficulty mastering skills during their probationary period because of the relative ease with which companies can deal with probationary employees compared to employees retained beyond their probationary periods. Experienced Operators Some experienced operators can present different types of safety chal- lenges to companies. They may perform satisfactorily during routine or expected situations but perform unacceptably when encountering nonrou- tine or emergency situations. Effective oversight should enable companies to identify those operators whose ability to respond to nonroutine situations is uncertain. Investigators, to the extent possible, should obtain company records of operator performance during both routine and nonroutine oper- ating periods, as well as records of company responses to operator performance deficiencies. Some operators may also knowingly violate company procedures when they are confident that company managers will not detect their actions, thereby endangering system safety. Here too companies must identify and respond to such safety hazards. Because of the need to ensure that opera- tors are following necessary procedures, companies that take little or no action in response to unjustified violations of procedures create antecedents to error by effectively communicating to operators that procedural noncom- pliance will not be addressed. Ultimately, companies may have to remove from safety-sensitive positions operators who have disregarded operating procedures. Investigators observed the outcome of such an operator in their investiga- tion of a 1993 aircraft accident, involving a pilot whom peers had reported as ignoring critical procedures (National Transportation Safety Board, 1994). The airplane, owned and operated by the Federal Aviation Administration, struck the side of a mountain, killing him and two of his peers onboard, before air traffic controllers could clear the plane to climb through clouds to a higher altitude and safely depart the area. The pilot chose not to delay takeoff to wait on the ground for air traffic controllers’ authorization to pro- ceed to his destination, most likely in the belief that he could obtain it more readily once airborne. After the accident, pilots who had flown with the captain described to investigators multiple instances of his unsafe practices, reports that corre- sponded to the nature of his performance on the accident flight in his will- ingness to violate rules and procedures. According to the investigators, his fellow operators reported that the pilot had (National Transportation Safety Board, 1994), 118 Continued on a visual flight rules [visual flight rules] positioning flight into instrument meteorological conditions [instrument meteorological conditions], Conducted visual flight rules flight below clouds at less than 1,000 feet above the ground in marginal weather conditions [violating safe operating practices], Replied to an air traffic control [air traffic control] query that the flight was in VMC [visual meteorological conditions] when it was in IMC, Conducted departures without other flightcrew knowing essential flight planning information, such as instrument flight rules [instrument flight rules]/VFR/ en route filing/weather briefing/ultimate destination or routing, Departed on positioning flights without informing other crewmem- bers whether he had obtained weather information or filed an appropri- ate flight plan, Disregarded checklist discipline on numerous occasions, Refused to accept responsibility that his failure to adhere to a checklist had caused an engine damage incident in January 1993, [an event that precipitated a letter of reprimand from his supervisors], Performed a “below glide path check” in instrument meteorological conditions when VMC conditions were required by FIAO [the federal aviation administration organization operating the flight] requirements, and refused to answer a second in command [co-pilot] query regarding the reason for his alleged violation of visual flight rules requirements in an incident 2 weeks before the accident. (p. 8) Moreover, investigators were informed of reports that other pilots had made to the captain’s supervisors regarding the captain’s procedural viola- tions. Yet, despite repeated complaints, the supervisors failed to address his performance. Their failure allowed him to continue violating procedures as he did on the accident flight—continued visual flight operation into instru- ment conditions—without air traffic control authorization. Consequently, investigators determined that the supervisors’ role in this accident was equivalent to that of the captain’s. While their action did not directly lead the accident, their inaction in the face of considerable information about his unsafe practices allowed the pilot to knowingly violate a procedure that caused the accident. As Reason (1997) notes, opportunities for “rogue” opera- tors to ignore procedures increase in organizations that have deficient over- sight, or have managers who are unwilling or unable to enforce compliance with the organization’s operating rules and procedures. “Good” Procedures By establishing the circumstances under which operators interact with the systems, and by setting the tone for their “corporate culture,” companies and organizations can positively affect operator performance. They can encour- age operators to keep management informed of perceived safety hazards, including instances of operator noncompliance with operating procedures. Reason (1997) recommended several techniques that companies can under- take to enhance the safety of system operations, including establishing a 119 “reporting culture,” in which companies encourage employees to report safety issues. Such reports, which can include an operator’s own errors, when conveyed in a fair and nonpunitive atmosphere, can encourage operators and their supervisors to recognize and address system antecedents to error, thus serving as a critical component of a corporate culture that enhances a com- pany’s operational safety. Companies can also develop and implement sal- ary and incentive programs that reward suggestions for improving safety. Where technical capabilities are in place, companies can read data from sys- tem recorders to monitor system state and operator performance. All have increased supervisor knowledge of potential safety issues in their operations. Formal Oversight Systems Since Reason (1990,1997) offered suggestions to enhance system safety, researchers have examined and regulators and companies have developed and implemented specific techniques to this end. For example, Helmreich and his colleagues studied techniques to expand crew resource management (CRM) practices to include error management (e.g., Klinect, Wilhelm, and Helmreich, 1999) and Guldenmund’s (2010) and Grote’s (2012) studies of corporate safety culture suggest techniques that companies can use to enhance safety. Today, international and domestic regulators have endorsed concepts to proactively enhance safety and have published manuals to assist companies to develop and implement them (International Civil Aviation Organization, 2002, 2013). Line Operations Safety Audit Line Operations Safety Audit or LOSA, was derived from Helmreich and his colleague’s research into cockpit resource management (e.g., Klinect, Wilhelm, and Helmreich, 1999). In LOSA, expert observers observe real world system operations (“line oper- ations”), and record crew actions and statements, both technical and team oriented, according to objective, predetermined assessment criteria. After the observation, the LOSA observers review the results with the operators and provide feedback on the technical and team-oriented quality of their performance, with suggestions for improvement, when warranted. LOSA is not designed to be used negatively, such as for criticizing or adversely rating performance, but rather constructively, to improve performance and enhance operational safety. Flight Operations Quality Assurance Flight Operations Quality Assurance (FOQA), as LOSA, was developed ini- tially in aviation but has since been implemented in other complex systems 120 as well. flight operations quality assurance uses software to analyze system recorder data, such as data on flight data recorders, not for accident investigation purposes for which they were developed, but to monitor operator performance of the systems in question (Federal Aviation Administration, 2004). Flight data recorders, which had recorded five parameters in the analog era (heading, altitude, airspeed, vertical acceleration, and microphone keying), now record hun- dreds of digital aircraft system and flight parameters that give precise indi- cations of the airplane, it’s state in the minutes before the accident, and pilot interactions with aircraft controls and major systems. Reading out flight data recorders proactively enables airlines, as with LOSA, to monitor opera- tor performance in certain maneuvers at particular airports, for example, and to determine whether additional training and/or procedural modifica- tions are needed. flight operations quality assurance provides airline information, in the absence of an accident or incident, about operator and aircraft performance in real time, with multiple pilot crews and aircraft, allowing them to learn of potential safety issues in the absence of an accident or incident, or in the absence of operator or management recognition of potential safety issues. Since airlines have begun implementing FOQA, other industries with onboard system recorders, such as companies operating oceangoing vessels that are required to be equipped with voyage data recorders, have begun similar initiatives as well. Safety Management Systems Safety Management Systems (SMS) are structured programs that enable companies to identify and mitigate risks to enhance the safety of their sys- tems. Unlike the previous two programs, safety management system was developed initially in the marine system, when, in 1993, the IMO made the implementation of these programs mandatory, in response to the March 6, 1987, Herald of Free Enterprise ferry accident off the coast of Belgium, in which 188 passengers and crew were killed (Department of Transport, 1987). An safety management system program is a systematic method of recognizing and mitigating risks in company opera- tions. Since its adaption in the marine industry other systems, such as avia- tion, have encouraged companies to implement safety management system programs as well. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA, 2015) describes four elements of safety management system programs: management policies, procedures, and organizational structures that accomplish the desired safety goals; a formal system of hazard identi- fication and safety risk management; controls to mitigate the risks (safety assurance); and a method of promoting safety as a core corporate value. These are among the methods that companies across different complex systems can use to proactively enhance safety. Companies and systems have employed programs that may be unique to the particular systems, or to the companies. It is important to note, however, that such programs are meant to be proactive and that investigators should not consider their absence, unless 121 mandated by the regulator, to be indicative of an organizational antecedent to error. Company Errors Researchers have examined differences between errors that can be attributed to an individual operator and those attributed to a company and its opera- tions. For example, Goodman, Ramanujam, Carroll, Edmondson, Hofmann, and Sutcliffe (2011) describe conditions that must be met for errors to be con- sidered organizational: First unintended deviations from organizational expectations…[regard- ing] work activities; second, the…actions of multiple individuals who are acting in their formal organizational roles and working toward organizational goals; third, [both of which] …can potentially result in adverse organizational outcomes; and, finally, [both of which] are pri- marily caused by organizational conditions. (p. 154) That is, for an error to be organizational and not individual, more than one individual had to have been involved in acting or deciding, in a manner considered to be furthering an organization’s goals, in ways that would lead to adverse consequences. Strauch (2015), expanding on this concept, adds that to identify company antecedents, one of three conditions have to be met. Investigators must be able to demonstrate that company officials (1) acted or made decisions in the face of information alerting them to the need for different actions or deci- sions, (2) acted or decided in the face of self-evident information of the need for corrective action, or (3) took no action or made no decision when an action and/or decision was warranted. Information on the need for corrective action can include a history of simi- lar accidents or incidents in a relatively brief period, operator or manager reports of safety deficiencies, FOQA, LOSA, and safety management system data, regulator-cited infractions, patterns of failures on operator examinations of proficiency, and patterns of maintenance deficiencies. In the face of such evidence, company action to address the information provided is warranted and inaction should be considered a company antecedent to error. Illustrations of self-evident data include work schedules that are fatigue-inducing, punitive oversight programs, and publicly berating operators who commit errors. Unfortunately, illustrations of organizational accidents are not common in the investigation literature; identifying them as such is a relatively recent phenomenon. Whether it is not acting on indications of safety shortcomings, deciding not to improve training when data calling for such improvement 122 is manifest, or tolerating bullying management, investigators have come to recognize and describe companies’ roles in accidents. Case Study On July 25, 2010, a 30-inch-diameter segment of a petroleum pipeline rup- tured near Marshall, Michigan (National Transportation Safety Board, 2012). The rupture was caused by a defect in a weld in the pipeline. Operators in the company’s Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, pipeline control center failed to detect the rupture for over 17 hours, in spite of multiple indications of a pipeline fault near Marshall, Michigan. Rather, they inter- preted the aural alerts and visual display information not as a rupture but as a separation in a column of oil in the pipeline, a result, they believed, of the effects of hilly terrain on the column of petroleum within the pipeline. While such terrain is known to cause column separation, because gravita- tional forces differentially effect oil flow within a pipeline with changes in terrain, the location of the leak was in a relatively flat area and the con- trol center operators, all from Alberta, were unfamiliar with the terrain in Michigan. As a result of their misinterpretation of the alerts and displays, the operators continued pumping oil through the ruptured pipeline on two separate occasions, for over 1½ hours, until they were informed of the leak by personnel in Michigan, 17 hours after the initial rupture. Only upon notification from those near the site of the rupture were they able to cor- rectly recognize that a pipeline rupture had occurred. Over 800,000 gallons of crude oil were released into the adjacent wetlands and a nearby creek and river. The cost of the cleanup, which continued over a year after the accident, exceeded $1 billion USD. Investigators found several company antecedents that led to the control- ler and supervisor failures to detect the rupture. Procedures developed specifically to insure that ruptures would be detected were violated. For example, controllers were required to stop oil flow after 10 minutes if alarms continued. However, in the belief that additional pressure from the pumps would join the separated oil column, pumping was allowed to con- tinue well beyond that limit. In addition, the performance of the operator teams—and of the teams of operators and their supervisors—broke down, resulting in ambiguous supervisory chains, in which supervisors deferred decisions to subordinates who lacked the necessary expertise, limiting the team’s ability to effectively analyze the rupture-related alarms and dis- plays. Further, investigators found that training exercises that the company had conducted for operators were invariant, and over time, the exercises failed to present the controllers with realistic scenarios that could have prepared them to effectively diagnose and respond to system anomalies. 123 “They have some preconfigured programs,” one controller told investiga- tors, “that we run and some of them have station lockouts and some of them have leaks and some of them have just com [communications devices] fails and different scenarios that we go through to help us to understand what we’re seeing” (National Transportation Safety Board, 2012, p. 48). In addition, control center supervisors were not required to take the recurrent training that the operators had been required to take, yet they nonethe- less played key roles in analyzing, incorrectly, the post-rupture alarms and displays. These safety lapses, as well as similar findings that investigators obtained in previous investigations of company incidents, had been known to control center supervisors and company managers, but they were not addressed. In fact, investigators found that supervisors had used the les- sons of earlier incidents to justify bypassing and violating company pro- cedures in the Marshall, Michigan, accident. Company supervisors and operators had information regarding the need for alternative courses of action, yet they did not act on them, thereby creating antecedents to the errors of the operators and their supervisors. This accident illustrates the types of antecedents that a company can commit that led to operator (and supervisor) errors, which exacerbated the effects of the rupture, creating a serious environmental accident. Summary Accident investigators as well as students of human error have come to recognize the role of companies that operate complex systems in creating antecedents to errors in those systems. The selection processes used to hire system operators can identify recognizable or predictable operator skills and deficiencies, and thus influence safety by the quality of operators they hire. Companies determine the optimum number of operators needed to run their systems during both routine and non-routine system states, they train opera- tors to safely operate the systems, and they conduct recurrent training to enable operators to remain current with changes in system design or operat- ing procedures. Companies also establish operating procedures and, within reason, enforce adherence to those procedures. Procedures should guide operators to interact with systems throughout the range of expected system states, yet provide sufficient flexibility to operators in the event that the pro- cedures do not apply to an unexpected event. Several systems have devel- oped and implemented programs to proactively enhance safety. Companies that have information of the need to address safety deficiencies but don’t act on them, or where safety lapses in system performance are such that compa- nies should but don’t act on them regardless, are considered responsible for antecedents to errors in their systems. 124 DOCUMENTING COMPANY ANTECEDENTS • Refer to company manuals and related written documenta- tion, interview managerial and operations personnel, human resource specialists, experienced operators, and both newly hired operators and if possible, applicants who were not hired, to obtain their accounts of the selection process, training, pro- cedures, and oversight. SELECTION • Determine the extent to which both the company’s selection criteria and selection process changed over a period of several years. • Match company-employed selection criteria to the skills that operators are expected to perform routinely. Note inconsisten- cies between the two, and determine the extent to which the process can adequately predict effective operator performance among applicants. • Assess the extent to which the company recognizes operator deficiencies during their probationary period and after they have fully qualified as operators. • Determine the number and proportion of operators in each of several years from the time of the accident, who were not retained beyond the conclusion of their probationary periods, or whose employment was terminated thereafter, because of performance deficiencies. • Describe performance deficiencies that led to the company actions. TRAINING • Compare the content of company training to the knowledge and skills operators need to effectively and safely control systems. • Document the training material presented, the methods of instruction, and instructional media, such as control station simulators, that the organization uses in training. • Determine the extent to which the content of company training pertained to the event under investigation. • Assess the extent to which company training surpasses, meets, or falls below the minimum level of instruction mandated. PROCEDURES AND OVERSIGHT • Determine the extent to which the operating procedures that the company established prepared operators to respond to the event being investigated. • Document the type and frequency of company oversight over a period of time up to the accident. • Determine the extent to which oversight informed the com- pany of operator application of company procedures. HISTORY • Document previous company accidents, incidents, and regulatory violations. • Document operator reports to the company of safety concerns. • Document company responses to accidents, incidents, regula- tory violations, and/or operator safety concerns. • Determine the extent to which errors or safety deficiencies resemble previous accidents, incidents, violations, and/or operator safety concerns and the company’s response to them.