Title: Safety Cases and Safety Reports Meaning, Motivation and Management - Chapter 3 Author(s): Richard Maguire Category: Safety Tags: Safety, Case, Reports, Aviation, Accidents Chapter Three The Safety Management System The Components of a Safety Management System A Safety Management System contains all the items used in managing safety. This must be understood and recorded if an understanding of the safety situation relating to something is to be obtained. This includes all the people, all the procedures, all the hardware, and all the computers and software that are employed within the system, which has an effect on the level of safety of the system. The safety management process is actually going to deliver the safe functioning of the system. Many of the components will be fairly obvious – a simple fire protection system, for example: 1. There will be hardware, such as the extinguishers and sprinkler systems (from water store to sprinkler head) 2. The training and operating procedures for using the extinguishers, raising the alarm, and undertaking an evacuation 3. There may well be fire control officers and certainly fire fighters, even if they are the external emergency services 4. There may also be smoke, heat, and infrared detectors relying on software and computers. This is just for a simple fire protection system in an office building; imagine what the fire safety management system would be like for an entire offshore oil installation. This is just one component of the overall Safety Management System – there will be similar system components for all the safety risks present on a particular site or within a particular operation. One of the contributory causes to many of the publicly known accidents (as cited in Chapter 1) has been shown to be management failure. This is not always the ‘Management’ as a group of people, this is ‘management’ as a corporate function – for which all employees have some responsibility. It is absolutely true that those in senior management positions should take the lead in safety – otherwise, how can the employees lower the pay scales and be expected to understand their own responsibilities? As an excellent example of this NASA’s Safety Manual [NASA 2004] states in Chapter 1, Part 1, Section 1.1.1 (i.e. right at the start!) that: Safety program responsibility starts at the top with senior management’s role of developing policies, providing strategies and resources, and is executed by the immediate task supervisor and line organization. All employees are responsible for their own safety, as well as that of others whom their actions may affect (Requirement 25001). In many industries, the lack of this type of management lead within the safety system has, and no doubt will still, lead to tragic accidents. Historical Incident The 1987 King’s Cross underground fire, probably started by a discarded cigarette even though there was a smoking ban in place, quickly propagated to engulf an escalator filled with members of the public. At the public inquiry, the contributory causes were highlighted as maintenance of equipment was not performed properly, the lack of formal risk assessment, no evacuation procedures, and no rehearsals had taken place (that would have highlighted that emergency radios would not work underground). The management team was lulled into a false sense of security by the fact that no previous escalator fire had caused a fatality. No one person was charged with the overall responsibility and management of safety. Engineers and scientists in managerial positions should recognize that they are likely to have enhanced responsibilities in several safety-related areas [Engineering Council 1993], for example: 1. The introduction and operation of a working safety management system 2. The discharge of their employee duties, so that they do not become a source of risks to safety 3. The responsibility of making judgements relating to the tolerability of risk. The whole ‘Corporate’ safety management scope should also reflect this approach. The management and approach to safety should be as systematic, planned, and focused as the effort applied to any other critical business process. Life cannot be recovered in the next fiscal quarter. Designing a Safety Management System: It is likely that you or your company already have some concept of managing safety. You may not explicitly recognize it as a safety management system, but some effort will be made to keep people safe. There are a number of key concepts to designing and implementing a satisfactory Safety Management System; each element is structured on the following stages of management [MoD 1996]: Policy: What are the requirements and objectives for the Safety Management System? Organisation: Who is responsible for delivering the policy? Implementation: How will the policy be delivered? Measuring Performance: What are the arrangements for monitoring the system's behavior? Review and Development: How will past performance be incorporated into future improvements? Understanding the components of a system that have an influence on safety is critical to having a low risk operation. Thinking about the people, procedures, hardware and software as inter-operating objects is a valuable process to understand and organise the way a safety report is presented. The object descriptions and relevant stages of management should be recorded in a written form – the precise name of the document is not so important, it may simply be called the Safety Management System Document! So, for our example of the fire control system, this document may look something like this. Policy: The fire control system is designed to reduce the risk of fire propagation and to allow evacuation of personnel to safe areas. Organization: The Managing Director has overall responsibility for the safe operation of the organizational structure to deliver the fire control system policy. The fire safety manager is responsible for implementing a fire control system. Implementation: The fire control system will comprise a combination of extinguishers and fixed sprinklers; smoke and heat detectors with audible fire alarms; procedures for testing all the appliances; training in the use procedures of the extinguishers; evacuation planning and exercises; and a reporting procedure for capturing the records of the implementation. Measuring: Annual testing of the sprinkler system; monthly testing of the smoke and heat detectors, weekly testing of the audible fire alarms; annual extinguisher-use refresher courses; quarterly fire evacuation exercises. Measurements are pass/fail criteria, completion of training courses and timing of evacuation. Review: The fire safety manager will report to the board of directors on a quarterly basis, highlighting the performance measurements. The safety report should make recommendations for future development. This type of Safety Management System document should be produced for every part of the safety features of the system. This should not be viewed as a trivial task as there may be something approaching 100 different entities in a complex system, many of which will inter-relate with other parts of the system. In the imaginary office, there may only be a few, but there will also be a need to review the ergonomics of working position design, use of office equipment (photocopiers, guillotines and printers), and even cleaning arrangements for windows, desks and floors (what chemicals are to be used and how are they stored?). For the more complex operation of a petrochemical plant, the safety management document set is likely to be considerable; the effort will be likewise, but then so will be the value of the information. Safety Management Planning At any stage of a project or operation there is a requisite set of plans to be produced, reviewed and updated – resource plans, cashflow plans, marketing plans, delivery plans. It is also essential to consider a safety plan detailing how safety is going to be managed through the project. The typical UK safety management plan also has to consider the safety of the natural world, and so is sometimes called ‘The safety and environmental management plan’. There are a number of useful descriptions of what a safety plan should contain and the format it should take. A few will be presented here to demonstrate the principle and it will be seen that although these have been developed by separate bodies for different purposes, even in separate countries, the construct and intent are largely consistent. This is reassuring to note because it encourages the idea that, as a safety community, these different sources have focused on and recorded the main significant areas of concern in the field of safety planning. Example of a UK Safety Plan From the UK Ministry of Defence [MoD 1996], the following advice is given for a project safety management plan– where the text is perhaps topic focussed, I have provided a more generic interpretation. Structure. The following structure [and content description] may be adopted as a basis for the safety programme plan: Part 1 Introduction. This part should describe the system of interest, the project scope and objectives, and a brief overview of the way safety will affect the project. Part 2 Safety requirements. This part should list all the safety requirements for the system of interest. These requirements will come from legislation, standards and codes of practice. The main purpose of this section is to provide a reference for all the project staff and to act as a record of all the requirements that are intended to be satisfied. This section should also record any interpretation of the requirements or any tailoring [selective adoption or rejection of specific requirements] that has occurred. Part 3 Management and Control. This part should contain a description of the 'who,’ ‘when,’ and ‘how’ parts of implementing the safety plan. It should specifically include the timing of various assessments and reviews; the human resource structure for the safety programme – including the identification of the main safety personnel and their training requirements; how any sub-contractors are going to be managed; and how records are going to be kept specifically including the records of hazards and safety decisions taken. Part 4 Analysis and Assessment. This part should describe the safety analyses and assessments that are going to be conducted on the system. It needs to explain what safety information is going to be obtained from each particular analysis, and how that will fit into the whole system safety programme. Example of a US Safety Plan From the US Occupational Health and Safety Administration [OSHA 2006], the following advice is given in the Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response Standard (HAZWOPER). Again, where the text has become specific, a more generic interpretation is given. Employers shall develop and implement a written safety and health plan for their employees involved in hazardous waste operations. The program shall be designed to identify, evaluate, and control safety and health hazards and provide for emergency response during hazardous waste operations. The written program shall incorporate the following. (A)An organizational structure. This part of the program shall establish the specific chain of command and identify the responsibilities of supervisors and employees. (B) A comprehensive workplan. This part of the program shall address the tasks and objectives of the system’s operations, including the processes, logistics, and resources required. This shall also include the anticipated clean-up activities as well as normal operations. (C) A site specific safety and health plan. This part of the program shall address the safety and health hazards specific to each phase of system operation. It shall consist of a hazard and risk analysis for each task; details of personal protective equipment to be used; frequency of contamination monitoring; any site control measures; details of the emergency response plan; and accident control measures. (D) The safety and health training program. This part of the program shall record the required training, which should thoroughly cover the following areas: Identification of the personnel responsible for safety and health; educating the employees about all hazards within the site or system; training in the use of the protective equipment; specifying the work practices by which an employee can minimize the risks from hazards; training in the safe use of equipment and controls; and having a medical surveillance program in place. [NOTE: This particular standard specifies that general site workers should receive a minimum of 40 hours of off-site instruction and three days field experience on-site, under the direct supervision of a trained and experienced supervisor. In the author’s mind, it remains debatable that training time alone is a reasonable factor in deciding on personnel’s suitability for safety work.] (E) The medical surveillance program. This part of the program shall specify the coverage [personnel to be included] and the nature and frequency of any medical surveillance program. This should relate to the nature and type of hazard present on the site or within the system e.g. chemical poisons, high noise levels and rotating equipment. The scope and role of the medical assessor should also be confirmed. (F) The employer’s standard operating procedures for safety and health. This part of the program shall address the engineering controls, work practices, and protective equipment procedures for the hazards on the site or within the system. Specific attention should be given to a selection of protective equipment, manual handling (especially drums and containers), transportation of hazardous materials, confined space entry, and decontamination procedures. In reviewing these two approaches, a number of key aspects are notably common. The specification of a chain of responsibility is very welcome, and although everyone has a duty towards safety, it really does focus the mind when YOU have specifically delegated some responsibility for safety. The safety, risk and hazard analysis sections are equally comparable, as is the description of the process, site or system of interest. The acknowledgment of safety training is excellent, as is the specification of a medical surveillance program in the US plan. A more generic step noted in both approaches is the health monitoring of the system of interest – the safety review process and how this is to be conducted. Usually this is through that good old business tool – meetings. Safety Planning Meetings These will inevitably take place; they are bound to, and at some point, you will probably have to go to one. You may even be ‘fortunate’ enough to have to organize or run one. However, the point that they will certainly take place is the very reason why they should be well organized and controlled right from the start– right from the project planning stage. There are many descriptions of these meetings – most of which are not suitable for this type of book, but it is useful to have a label by which to recognize the forum for reporting, discussing, and deciding about safety issues. The meeting may be called ‘The Safety Panel’, ‘The Project Safety Committee’, or perhaps ‘The Project Safety Working Group’. There is no consistent, mandated term for the meeting or the delegates, so I do not intend to force one on you. However, some aspects that are usually mandated are: that there is a group or team that has responsibility for safety, that they meet on a regular basis and that they actually review, monitor and control the safety performance of the project, operation or working practice. For a significantly sized project it may be worth having a series of meetings at different managerial levels, involving specific domains or managerial levels. For example, a Safety Panel for high-level policy setting and decision making coupled with a Safety Working Group that carries out and monitors the risk and hazard analysis tasks. At the planning stage of a project, it is worth the effort to get these meetings organized well and to confirm the delegates of each group. The delegates will vary over the project life through natural staff turnover and also by function as different aspects of safety come to the fore during a project. A series of terms of reference should be developed to structure the scope and function of the meetings. The terms of reference for any meeting should address several key areas: purpose, tasks, responsibilities, membership and how the group will communicate with other stakeholders. Governmental departments in many countries follow this course of progression and have produced guideline terms of reference for safety meetings. An example is given below for a typical Safety Management Committee [MoD 1996]. Purpose: To coordinate the efforts of the team and to assist the team leader on safety issues relating to systems and equipment managed by them. Tasks: Prepare and monitor a programme for the preparation and review of safety documentation. Advise and assist other teams who have interfacing equipment or systems. Set up and keep the safety policy and strategy under review, set the thresholds for tolerable and intolerable safety performance, and provide definitions and limitations within safety planning documents. Ensure that other agencies are aware of their safety responsibilities as a consequence of safety boundary definitions. Review hazard assessments, risk classifications, and recommendations to users. Set up and manage an audit programme. Planned and directed the training of team personnel on safety management issues. Review safety progress and the actions taken to resolve new hazards. Provide operator advice on the implementation of control measures. Ensure the publication of safety documents is under configuration control. Monitor the safety performance that is being achieved in the field. Responsibility: Compile meeting minutes and safety report following each meeting. Report to Directors (higher managers) quarterly or as appropriate. Membership: Team leader Safety Manager (if separate) Designer Customer Training authority Maintenance authority Safety auditor Specialist advisors (if required) Having some terms of reference helps all those concerned to have a more calm approach to safety management and to safety issues in general. The terms provide guidance to the meeting itself and help everyone understand the scope and jurisdiction of the safety management team and the safety management system as a whole.