Title: Safety Cases and Safety Reports Meaning, Motivation, and Management Chapter 1 Author(s): Richard Maguire Category: Safety Tags: Safety, Case, Reports, Aviation, Accidents Safety Cases And Safety Reports The core of safety engineering is a systematic approach to identifying the hazards and hazardous events that could happen and then eliminating or controlling the risk. All this must be done until the risk is tolerable, and then it must be recorded, demonstrated, and sustained over time. In step with this, there is a duty to assure yourself and demonstrate to others that your system, project, process, or piece of equipment is tolerably safe, not only to the people who come into direct contact with it but also to members of the public and the environment at large. Corporate image and survivability are at stake when considering what safety-related actions to take. It really can be the difference between life and death; if it is applied correctly, the benefits to the organization are truly amazing – lower lost time, fewer workplace incidents, improved staff loyalty, and a better bottom line. The major tools for accomplishing all of this are the concept of a safety case and safety report. The parallels with a legal case are useful – they equally scare corporate managers. The main difference with the safety case is that you have the opportunity to construct the case in your own time and whilst you are developing the system. You do not have to be called to court to start preparing your case; you can do it now while you have all the information around you and full control over it. The key elements of this text are based on identifying the meaning and measurement of safety and risk, the motivation behind the need to construct a safety case, the management of the task of generating and presenting one, and how to maintain it once it has been produced. Explicit guidance is given on developing risk matrices and safety targets, demonstrating ALARP, the value of preventing a fatality, and tools and techniques for safety assessments. Coupled with these are specific chapters on human factors, software factors, and management factors and how they influence safety performance and safety cultures. All these areas need to be considered in a robust, consistent, and complete safety case. The text takes a world view of safety engineering across all the hazardous industries – nuclear, rail, chemical, defense, and construction, citing historical and not-so-historical incidents to provide real examples of the textural points being made. Some you will probably be familiar with, others show classic traits of poor safety practice and worse safety management. The importance of the safety case cannot be understated; it has become integral to the UK industry, with statutes mandating its use in certain high-risk industries. Knowledge of it is required to operate at any level in any of the industries noted above. Additionally, risk and safety have become political issues; the UK Government has expressly said that safety management – getting the right balance between innovation and change on one hand and avoidance of shocks and crisis on the other – is now central to the business of good government.1 Within the US, the safety case concept has yet to take real hold. It is certainly known that, even as long ago as 1998, an influential paper on maintaining US leadership in aeronautics directly recommended safety arguments systematically presented in the form of a safety case. This document also cited that this would provide the aircraft industry with an approach to certification that is rapid, repeatable, and accurate.2 Around the rest of the world, safety case concepts are employed with great effect. From European air traffic control to Australian petroleum facilities, the safety case is essential in recording risks, the controls in place, and the safety management system in place to ensure that the controls are competently and steadily applied. This book will provide an introduction to and discussion of the contemporary techniques for developing and assessing safety cases and safety reports. It gives an understanding of the principles behind the techniques so that readers can start to make judgments about safety and risk during their studies and work. The text also seeks to enhance the reader’s appreciation of the importance of the role of safety engineering within the team, the organization, and the societal community. Finally, whilst this book offers a full and wide-ranging consideration of system safety engineering, it is guidance and discussion only and is in no way a replacement for full safety assurance. Safety concerns should be addressed by a team of competent professionals, using their experience and judgment in combination with best practices, techniques, and other applicable processes. Chapter One Accidents and Safety Introduction At whatever stage in your life you are starting to read this book, you will have been aware of disasters in the world. Ever since William Huskisson MP became the first person to be killed on UK Railways in September 1830 on the opening day of the Liverpool to Manchester line, the record of industrial accidents and disasters has been added to with frightening regularity. Even in recent history, when disasters have become global media events, the list keeps on growing. Table 1.1 contains a list of relatively recent events that may be classed as disasters –certainly by those affected. Probably everyone reading this now will be recalling memories of these or some dreadful accident that occurred to them, someone they knew, at some place they knew, or something else that became a national tragedy, to the extent that it was the lead story for days and actually has anniversary memorials. I can think of far too many of these. However, with each occurrence of harm, injury, or loss, engineers grow more informed about what happens in the world in which they build. Design and operating improvements are mandated, codes of better practice are developed, and protection and information schemes are put in place. The goal of all these approaches is to ensure that similar events do not happen again and that, as time progresses, the world becomes collectively safer. Each replacement product, system, or process should be safer than the one it replaces; each brand-new product, system, or process should be compared with existing items to benchmark and improve on its safety performance. Of course, it is far better not to have to wait for an accident to occur in order to prevent any similar future ones from happening. Humanity is thinking very hard about how accidents initiate, develop, and propagate into disasters, such that they can be prevented before they have the opportunity to cause harm, injury, or loss. Many industries and countries have authorities and inspector organizations that research and police hazardous areas of work and judge safety performance. Evidence is often called for in the demonstration of safety performance, and this has many beneficial features, from identifying areas for improvement to actually providing defense evidence in legal cases. This compilation of evidence has several names across the many industries and nations of the world, but its focus is always on understanding the safety status of a system with the familiar goal of avoiding future accidents. Some of the titles given (not an exhaustive list) to these processes and documents are as follows: 1. Contemporary Safety Status Report 2. Safety Case & Safety Case Report 3. Annual Safety Report 4. Control of Major Accident Hazards Report 5. Occupational Safety and Health Plan 6. Health and Safety Plan (HASP) 7. Health Hazard Assessment Report 8. System Safety Approach Documentation 9. Safety Assessment Report (SAR). This book will make reference to many of these but will inevitably concentrate on just a few as vehicles for discussing the issues relevant to all safety regimes. The Safety Case The precise meaning of the term ‘safety case’ rather depends on your particular relationship with the safety case and the particular purpose the safety case is intended to satisfy. It is likely that each person approaching the phrase ‘safety case’ will have some preconceived idea about what they are getting involved with. For a safety virgin, this idea is unlikely to be well developed – that is to be expected and is perfectly acceptable. For a seasoned guru or safety ‘black belt, ' the meaning of ‘safety case’ is quite familiar. However, it is of value to review the definitions contemporary with this text so that the readers become familiar with them in general and in the context of the book. Before approaching the more technical and specialist areas for detailed definitions, it is worth a cursory look through a language dictionary. Mine, published by the Longman Group twenty years ago [Longman 1986], doesn’t contain a ‘safety case’ as an entry; I would not expect it to. However, it contains both ‘case’ and ‘safety’ information. The combination offers a powerful starting point for a very useful definition. Case: n b(1) the evidence supporting a conclusion; b(2) an argument, especially one that is convincing. Safety: none the condition of being safe from causing or suffering hurt, injury, or loss. This combination of ‘convincing argument and evidence supporting a condition of being safe from hurt, injury or loss’ is certainly not trivial. With the addition of a few specific terms for individual areas, this combination of pretty standard dictionary definitions may be seen to be the root of many more complicated and technical descriptions of the subject. Well done Longman. The most recent available technical definition from a UK military standard [MoD 2004] cites the safety case as being Safety Case A structured argument supported by a body of evidence that provides a compelling, comprehensible, and valid case that a system is safe for a given application in a given operating environment. The comparison of the dictionary and military standard statements, with over a twenty-year gap, highlights an unexpected (to this author at least) but welcome similarity. The principle aim of a safety case is to derive and present an argument that the system in question will be acceptably safe in a given context. The concept of a safety case is not industry-specific; the system could be from any industry. It just needs to be an entity with boundaries, for example, a physical system – an engine, a factory, a weapon, or a washing machine; it could be procedural, for example, an oil production facility, a transport network, or an assembly line; or it can even be related to some specific event, for example, a sports game, a prototype test flight or the demolition of a building. The safety case should contain all necessary information to enable the safety status of the entity to be determined, and while the structure may remain fairly constant, the status of the particular elements will change over the life of the entity; for example, the planned analysis will be replaced by the analysis results. Of course, the context is all-important – a weapon might be considered completely safe when it is not being fired, but it does have other properties that can cause harm, injury, or loss. It may have sharp edges and a pointed front end. It may have a significant mass, so when stationary and on its rack, it has significant potential energy, and when being transported, it will have significant kinetic energy. So, a lot more than just the explosive energy needs to be analyzed when assessing the safety of a weapon system. Historical incident: An inert missile system used for trials was being transported around a yard area on its trolley. The trolley was being pushed by two persons between storehouses at walking pace. The new housing had a lip at the door to allow secure sealing, so the trolley had to be gently 'bumped' over the lip. The front wheels were bumped by a person at the front, who then walked into the store, guiding the missile trolley and keeping it straight. Person two bumped the rear trolley wheels but had to give a significant shove to get the trolley in. The extra effort pushed the trolley towards the back wall of the store, and person one instinctively attempted to stop the trolley with his hand. The hand was crushed between the trolley and the back wall. This manual handling procedure had been reviewed and designed with safety in mind. Transportation was done at a walking pace with two persons for maximum control. The trolley was specifically designed for the weapon system in use so that the missile could not be dropped or worked free. It was considered very safe. However, the interaction with the storage system was not considered – the store was not considered to be part of the weapon system and was not considered to be part of the transportation process. The boundary for safety analysis was set too small; the context was not wide enough. The Safety Case Report The safety case is the whole safety justification – just as is a case for law, it comprises every appropriate piece of evidence to make a convincing argument to support some conclusion about guilt or innocence. In this case, the argument concerns the safety performance of some entity or system. As a collection of evidence, a guide is needed to describe how the evidence was obtained, why it was obtained, and what deductions can be made from it. In a court of law, this is done by the solicitor or attorney, but in a safety case, this is done by the safety engineer through the safety case report. This report summarises all the key components of the safety case, makes the safety argument explicit, and describes the supporting evidence. All supporting documents, analysis, and results should be based on the safety case report. This evidence does need to be available for scrutiny, but it does not need to bulk out the safety case report. The safety case report should cite evidence that indicates that the entity, process, or system in question meets all applicable legislation and standards. It should confirm that key staff are in place with defined responsibilities, that any further safety requirements and targets that have been set and met are appropriate, that hazard analysis has been carried out correctly, that the level of residual risk is tolerable, and that the safety performance of the entity, process or system has been independently assessed. Several UK industries have legal obligations to produce a safety case for their operation, such as rail, nuclear, petrochemical, and some other chemical facilities. Several more industries have made the creation and provision of a safety case a mandatory part of satisfying contract conditions, for example, the defense industry. Without the safety case, contracts are breached, and legal redress is sought. Still, more individual companies have adopted safety cases as a good idea to put rigor and process into their safety programs. The contents, development process, and management of safety cases and safety case reports are obviously fundamental topics and will be the subject of later chapters in this book. Health and Safety Plan Again, before getting to the more technical descriptions of what a Health and Safety Plan actually is, there should be a customary review of the standard dictionary definitions [Longman 1986]. Not surprisingly, the phrase is not listed on its own, but the individual items are: Health: n 2, condition <of the body> esp. sound or flourishing; well-being. Safety: n 1, the condition of being safe from causing or suffering hurt, injury, or loss. Plan: n 2, a method for achieving an end, a detailed formulation of a program of action. So combining these together leads to a detailed program of action to achieve the conditions of being safe from suffering hurt, injury, or loss and flourishing with well-being. Again, it's not bad, perhaps a bit wordy, but it would appear to be perfectly clear and reasonable. This plan does have different areas of focus in different countries and industries. In the US, the Health and Safety Plan (HASP) specifically addresses hazardous waste. This includes decontamination and clean-up of a hazardous waste site and investigating the potential presence of hazardous substances. The key elements of a HASP [DOE 1994], whilst having the specific objectives described above, would be useful in many other safety-related planning programs. They are as follows: 1. Site characterization and system description 2. Identifying the safety and health risks 3. Specifying requirements for personal protective equipment 4. Specifying requirements for health surveillance 5. Site control, monitoring, and decontamination 6. Production of an emergency response plan 7. Procedures for confined entry and spill containment. An electronic assistant is available from US government websites to lead the development of each of these written elements and allow the incorporation of site-specific detailed information. In the UK, a Health and Safety Plan again has a specific job function; however, it is very different from that in the US. The construction industry is the focus of the UK HASP; it is the subject of The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations [HMSO 1994], which aims to improve the management of health, safety, and welfare of construction workers through all stages of a construction project. Adherence to the regulations also ensures that critical safety information about a building is available for construction workers and users throughout and after the construction process. As part of tendering for a construction contract, a Health and Safety Plan must be submitted. The pre-tender plan must be developed for the construction phase to include: 1. A full description of the project 2. Arrangements for managing the project 3. Arrangements for monitoring compliance with health and safety requirements 4. The identified risks to health and safety 5. Arrangements for the welfare of people associated with the project. Upon inspection, there is a good comparison between the international uses of the HASP; even though the plans are used for different industries, the objectives and contents are remarkably similar. As with the safety case, the use of the HASP does not necessarily need to be industry-specific. The approaches set down would be equally applicable to any industry, any project, and any system. System Safety Approach Documentation The System Safety Approach is approved for use by all departments and agencies within the US Department of Defense (DoD) [DoD 2000]. Its objectives are to protect private and public personnel from accidental death, injury, or occupational illness and to protect public property, equipment, weapon systems, material, and facilities from accidental destruction or damage while executing missions of national defense. Within mission requirements, the department of defense will also ensure that the quality of the environment is protected to the maximum practical extent. The scope of the system safety approach covers the management of environment, safety, and health mishap risks during the development, testing, production, use, and disposal of department of defense systems. The forward-to-the-approach standard also notes that the safety goal is zero mishaps. In common with the introduction to the other approaches to safety, it is again worth referring to dictionary [Longman 1986] definitions of some of the main terms used here. System: n 1c A group of interrelated and interdependent objects or units; 2 An organized set of doctrines or principles usually intended to explain the arrangement or working of a whole body. Safety: the condition of being safe from causing or suffering hurt, injury, or loss. Approach: A manner or method of doing something, especially for the first time. Together, these terms give a good description of the intent of a System Safety Approach, but they don't match up to the department of defense definitions [DoD 2000], which are as follows: System: An integrated composite of people, products, and processes that provide a capability to satisfy a stated need or objective. Safety: Freedom from those conditions that can cause death, injury, occupational illness, damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment. There isn’t a cited definition for ‘Approach,’ but there is one for ‘System Safety’which goes further and has a different focus than the two separate definitions given above. It is as follows: System safety: The application of engineering and management principles, criteria, and techniques to achieve acceptable mishap risk within the constraints of operational effectiveness and suitability, time, and cost throughout all phases of the system life cycle. To enable further understanding, I would like to draw out the meaning of the word 'mishap.' This may sound rather quaint as if one had tripped over a shoelace, but it actually has a much more serious meaning than this when used in the context of safety. From my dictionary, Mishap: n An unfortunate accident. and from the department of defense [DoD 2000]; Mishap. An unplanned event or series of events resulting in death, injury, occupational illness, damage to or loss of equipment or property, or damage to the environment. Overall, the department of defense system safety approach is sound, although the definitions have to have more thought applied to them to follow them through. On the whole, the definitions do compare well with the earlier defined terms from the UK and Europe, as well as from the different industry fields. At this stage, there is no consistent term used for the collection of hazard, risk, and safety information, but looking at the varied terms and phrases used, the intent appears to remain largely consistent. As with the other areas looked at so far, there is a requisite set of documentation of the system safety approach. The objective of this document suite called by the department of defense is to record the developer’s and program manager's approved system safety engineering approach. The documentation should: 1. Identify each hazard analysis and mishap risk assessment process used. 2. Include information on safety integration into the overall program structure 3. Define how hazards and residual mishap risks are communicated to and accepted by the appropriate risk acceptance authority 4. Define how hazards and residual mishap risks will be tracked throughout the program life. There are a series of steps and results recording to go through when implementing the systems safety approach. These are described as follows: 1. Identification of hazards 2. Assessment of mishap risks 3. Identification of mishap risk mitigation measures 4. Reduce mishap risk to an acceptable level 5. Verification of mishap risk reduction 6. Acceptance of residual mishap risks 7. Track mishap risk throughout the system life cycle. It is worth a comparative look back at some of the steps previously brought out under other safety approaches – there is no single catchy collective phrase for all these processes and evidence, but the consistency is surprising and certainly most welcome. These processes are fundamental topics and will be the subjects of later chapters in this book. Control of Major Accident Hazards (COMAH) The main aim of the UK COMAH regulations [HMSO 1999] is to prevent and mitigate the effects of major accidents involving dangerous substances, such as benzene, liquefied petroleum gas, explosives, certain nuclear materials, and arsenic pentoxide which can cause serious damage/harm to people and/or the environment. It is worth noting that the COMAH Regulations treat risks to the environment as seriously as those to people. Sites are designated COMAH applicable due to the quantities and type of hazardous materials under their control – there are two tiers of interest, with the top tier being those sites with the highest quantities of dangerous materials. The top-tier sites have a significant number of duties to perform, one of which is to summarise their compliance through the preparation and presentation of a COMAH safety report. A safety report is a document prepared by the operator of the site, and its aim is to demonstrate that all measures necessary for the prevention and mitigation of major accidents have been taken. At this point, it is certainly worth reviewing the definition of a ‘major accident’ – what does this actually mean? The particular statute in place under UK law [HMSO 1999] has the following definition: Major Accident: An occurrence (including, in particular, a major emission, fire, or explosion) resulting from uncontrolled developments in the course of the operation of any establishment and leading to serious danger to human health or the environment, immediate or delayed, inside or outside the establishment, and involving one or more dangerous substances. As good as this is, there are no specifics on how much of an emission of nasty chemicals is major and how much is not. Well, within the regulations, a list of categories and quantities of dangerous substances is given to which the regulations apply. These are as follows: 1. Very Toxic 5000 Kg 2. Toxic 50000 Kg 3. Oxidizing 50000 Kg 4. Explosive 10000 Kg 5. Extremely Flammable 10000 Kg 6. Highly Flammable 20000 Kg 7. Highly Flammable (Liquid) 5000 Tonnes 8. Flammable 5000 Tonnes 9. Dangerous for the Environment 200 Tonnes 10. The material reacts violently with water 50000 Kg. Specific meanings are given in the appendices of the regulations [HMSO 1999] for the differences between the levels of flammability and toxicity. The HSE itself gives an indication of the quantities of these types of materials that have to be involved for a class of major to be called and for official notification to the executive to be mandatory [HSE 1999]. 1. Sudden, uncontrolled release in a building of: 100 kg or more of flammable liquid; 10 kg of flammable liquid above its boiling point; 10 kg or more of flammable gas; 2. Sudden, uncontrolled release in a building of 500 kg of these substances if the release is in the open air; and accidental release of any (quantity of any) substance which may damage health. Another criterion used is the effect on any local population. If the total length of time a population is required to remain indoors or quarantined exceeds 500 person-hours (for example, 100 people for 5 hours or 1000 people for half an hour), the incident will still be classed as a major accident even if no one is actually injured. Historical Incident: A COMAH top-tier establishment produces a range of chemicals, including motor fuel additives, chlorine, and solvents. It is top tier because of the inventory of lead alkyls, chlorine, liquefied, extremely flammable gases, and other toxic chemicals. On Sunday 11 July 1999, a road tanker containing 20 tonnes of molten sodium had been returned from a customer and was being heated to melt the sodium prior to unloading. This caused a positive pressure within the vessel. The operators failed to vent the pressure as per standard operating procedures. Sodium had solidified in the outlet valve and a plant operator attempted to clear it using a metal rod. When he did so, 4 tonnes (1,800 lbs.) of molten sodium spilled out and ignited. The on-site and off-site emergency plans were activated. The on-site emergency response team succeeded in putting the fire out after 3 hours, by smothering it with sand. The police instructed local residents to remain indoors and more than 1000 people were confined to their homes for 3 hours. The nearby M53 motorway was closed for 45 minutes, and a local charity football match was disrupted. This was a major accident because the confinement of people indoors exceeded 500 person-hours. There were no injuries or off-site damage. The cause was an operator error, which resulted in the failure to follow the correct operating procedures for clearing a blockage in the road tanker outlet. The company had to demolish the offloading facility and rebuild it to modern standards at a cost of£200,000.[HSE 2001] Summary There are multiple requirements throughout the world for risk and safety analysis in a wide variety of industries. It is unfortunate that they are all identified by different terms and phrases, and it is not the specific aim of this book to say that any descriptive term is better than any other. The main interest of citing the definitions and objectives used is to demonstrate that even though different words are used, there is a hugely significant overlap in process and goal. This will mean that as you go through the rest of this text, even though the content may be discussing some part of a safety case or a system safety approach, you should feel reasonably comfortable that the discussion is not confined or limited to that particular safety documentation.