Title: Safety Cases and Safety Reports Meaning, Motivation, and Management - Chapter 2 Author(s): Richard Maguire Category: Safety Tags: Safety, Case, Reports, Aviation, Accidents The Language of Safety The Concepts of Language All language has the same goal – to communicate someone's thoughts. When those thoughts are about matters of life and death (as in safety work), it is vital that the writer and reader have the same understanding of the original thoughts. The modern English language has a great ability to express many things in many different ways. It sometimes seems that there is a word for everything we could possibly want to express. Unfortunately, this is not the case. We do have words for the graded separations of ‘high,’ ‘medium’, and ‘low,’ but we only have ‘safe and ‘unsafe.’ There is no single word for the level of safety that is at an acceptable level between safe and unsafe. Perhaps there isn’t one; that is, the concept of safety is a binary condition; you either are or are not – there is no in-between. This debate is ongoing, and I do not intend to settle it myself. This text will consider that there is a mid-region between safe and unsafe, even if the region is just thought of as a ‘line’ rather than a continental-sized area. There is a problem with English as a language. It’s a process called ellipsis, and it allows you to leave out words you think are obvious. It is perfectly acceptable grammar. For example, if I tell you that I am presenting some equipment safety evidence in a report, and you ask, “What has been demonstrated?” you actually mean ‘What has been demonstrated about the equipment by the safety evidence ?’ You just left out the second half of the sentence. This is perfectly fine because you and I are both fully aware of the context of our statements. But I have seen examples in real safety documents where, after a while, I’m not sure about what was trying to be said. This is because of the unconscious use of the ellipsis process. Here is a paragraph of text from a real safety requirement document introducing the report section on the tracking of software failures, Visible bug tracking Here, we provide evidence of software bug tracking. ‘XXXXX’ is the database that is used to track all issues regarding this system. It has full visibility and is extremely detailed. You might think this is perfectly understandable, but there are a number of areas where extra context has been assumed, and so I am left thinking, have I really understood what has been written? What is actually meant by ‘all issues’? Should this really be ‘all software issues,’ ‘all bug issues’, or ‘all safety issues’? What does ‘full visibility’ mean? Full visibility of what? ‘Full visibility of the software’? ‘Full visibility of bug information’? Does the ‘it’ really mean that ‘it’ presents full visibility to the viewer? Or is there something more here, perhaps some extra functionality that we need to know more about? From the text as it is, we just don’t know; we have to make assumptions. And as you should already know, making assumptions can make an ‘ass’ out of ‘u’ and ‘me.’ Great caution is urged when writing safety reports; please try to be aware of the use of the ellipsis process. Putting in more words does make the written report more voluminous and, therefore, potentially less likely to be read extensively by a busy superior, but leaving out words can cause confusion and delay and be very dangerous. This point has led to several graphical-based tools being used to paint a picture of the safety status, reasoning, and strategies employed. Later chapters of this book will consider these in more detail. The Language of Risk, Chance, Probability, and Hazard These words are very often used interchangeably but actually have very different meanings. Each of the words has certainly been used and swapped around in the safety reports that I have seen. Consider the following three statements: There is a risk of an accident. There is a chance of an accident. There is a probability of an accident. As the reader of these statements, ask yourself if there is any (real) difference between these three statements and your current understanding of what risk, chance, and probability mean. One difference might be the potential numerical relationship between these non-numerate terms. Risk has the idea of something that might really happen; chance seems to imply that something might not happen, and probability certainly has the message that something will definitely happen. However, this is subjective and certainly not consistent across all safety practitioners. It is always worth a look at how dictionaries [Longman 1986] have defined these terms. Risk: n one possibility of loss, injury, or damage. 2 a dangerous element or factor; a hazard. risk: vt 1 to expose to hazard or danger. chance: n 1a an event without discernible human intention or observable cause ... 5 a risk. Chance: vt to accept the hazard of risk. Hazard: 1 something that may be dangerous. Hazard 2 is a risk that cannot be avoided. Hazard: takeoff safety speed to risk losing your money, property, etc, in an attempt to gain something. probability: n three a measure of the likelihood that a given event will occur, usually expressed as the ratio of the number of times the event occurs in a test series to the total number of trials in the series.' There are a number of points worth discussing on these definitions. Probability is definitely linked to numbers; risk nearly gets there with the use of possibility. Risk certainly introduces the idea of something negative happening. Chance, on the other hand, appears to be either good or bad. The interchangeability between risk and chance is given acceptability by the transitive verb (vt) definition of chance being the acceptance of risk. Most of the time, it is some definition of probability (akin to selecting a particular playing card) that people think they are referring to when they use all the terms. However, they are different words and do have different meanings, even if in our modern language use they are often used interchangeably to mean the same thing. As cited at the start of the chapter, it is essential to have a shared meaning between author and reader, and it is the responsibility of the author to do this because they are her or his thoughts that are being expressed. The Origins of Chance, Risk and Probability Chance originally meant ‘that which befalls’; it has come to modern language use from the Latin root ‘cadere’ meaning ‘fall’ and via Old French as the word ‘choir, whose noun derivative includes ‘chaunce’ [Ayto 1990]. Chance has a ‘God's will’ aspect to it, as if the person involved has no influence over the outcome, perhaps as in an earthquake. There seems to be a completely random element to chance – that is perhaps why dice and cards are sometimes referred to as games of chance. Although, having stated that, there is always the option of not taking part in the game at all, one of the classic arguments for safety. The ultimate origins of ‘risk’ have not yet been satisfactorily explained. Its recent history is sure; English acquired it via the French word ‘risque’ and the Italian ‘risco,’ which is a derivative of the word ‘scare’ meaning ‘to run into danger.’ One potential origin might be related to an earlier meaning of ‘sail into danger,’ perhaps by sailing too close to rocks (‘rhiza’ being Greek for cliff), but this has yet to be proven [Ayto 1990]. One thing is obvious, however, and that is the difference between chance and risk – at least from their origins. Risk is something the person involved has chosen to do. Running or sailing into danger contains a positive decision to accept the danger involved, to go and run the risk. This would be in return for some benefit, such as getting to port quicker. The concept of deciding to take a risk for some benefit does carry over into the modern use of the word in the safety domain. In modern safety language, the risk is taken as having two parts to it – the idea of some severity of impact (the level of nastiness of the event consequences) and the likely probability that the impact will occur. These two factors must be treated in combination to have a full understanding of risk. As the risk of fatality is often the most severe impact in the safety domain, the term ‘risk of fatality (per unit)’ often gets shortened to just ' risk’ via the use of the ellipsis process. It is always worth posing the question: risk of what? and how often? It may be seen as annoying by others (the voice of experience here), but it can often lead to a valuable review of just what it is that everyone is discussing. Probability derives from the Latin ‘probabilis’ and the Middle French word‘probare’, meaning to test, approve, and prove. The further French word ‘probus’means good and honest [Ayto 1990]. On the face of it, it doesn't seem to have any mathematical origins. The mathematical significance of probability became more important when gambling was (even more) popular. A gentleman in France called The Chevalier de Mere invited mathematician Blaise Pascal to carry out testing and proving on a gambling problem he was considering. De Mere played a game in which one would bet on the likelihood of throwing a six during four throws of a die. This progressed to the likelihood of throwing a double six during 24 throws. Gamblers of the time believed that the two games were equally fair as the ratio of possible outcomes to a number of throws was the same (4 to 6 for a single die and 24 to 36 for two dice), giving a break-even ratio of 0.666. It was shown that the single-die game gave the probability of throwing a six from four throws as just over a half, and so was balanced in favor of the thrower. In the two-dice game, the probability of throwing a double six within 24 throws was shown to be just under a half and so was balanced against the thrower. One would need to throw the two dice one more time to get a balance in favor of the thrower. The relationship of the break-even ratio was eventually solved by a man called Abraham de Moivre in 1716; the factor he calculated was 0.693 – which interestingly turns out to be the natural logarithm of 2. The actual expression for carrying out the calculation is: Throws to obtain a specific result = ln2 x Number of possible outcomes. So, the number of throws needed in order to have at least a 0.5 likelihood of throwing at least one double six is 0.693 x 36 = 24.95. Much nearer to 25 than 24 [Webb 1996]. The Origins of Hazard Back before the Middle Ages, the North Africans played a gambling game using little cubes with numbers called ‘az-zahr’, the Arab word for the die itself. The game transferred across the Mediterranean to France, where it was named; it then moved over the English Channel to England sometime before 1500 AD, where it was given the English spelling of the same word, ‘Hazard.’ The word continuing airworthines management exposition to mean an unlucky throw of the dice since you would lose your bet if the throw continuing airworthines management exposition out incorrectly. This word now has the meaning in the safety domain of a source of danger or a situation with the potential to cause harm. In recent history, hazards have always existed; it is their control that prevents accidents from occurring. This was not the original meaning of the word, which was more akin to chance, i.e., something you could not avoid and had little control over the result of playing the game (of chance). Incidentally, that particular game is still played in modern casinos – it’s now called ‘Craps.’ The differences in origin and meaning of these four terms, especially ‘risk’ where you may have a decision to make, and ‘chance’ and ‘hazard’ where you may not, are critical to their accurate use in modern safety language and must be mutually understood when discussing situations in this domain. Please take a few moments to recall your last use of one of these words, and ask yourself if you really meant what you said or said what you really meant. The Origins of Safety and Safety Case Safety is derived from the Latin ‘salvus’ meaning ‘uninjured.’ The same root has also given us ‘salvage,’ ‘salvation’, and ‘solid,’ all of which are obviously related to being rescued and sound. Again, it reached English from the French via the word ‘sauf.’ Salvus itself goes back even further to ancient Indo-European languages with ‘solwos’ meaning ‘whole.’ Another derivative of salvus has led to the herb name ‘sage’, which has the etymological definition of ‘healing or saving plant’, due to its medicinal properties [Ayto 1990]. The concept of safety has been around and understood for thousands of years. The English word ‘safety’ has probably been around for hundreds of years. The concept of a safety case and safety reporting has probably been around for only a few tens of years. We have already discussed several meanings and definitions of the phrase safety case, but have yet to look at the origins of its use. The earliest legislative requirement for a safety case in the UK comes from The Nuclear Installations Act of 1965 section 14 [HMSO 1965] on safety documentation, which states: Without prejudice to any other requirements of the conditions attached to this license, the licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements for the production and assessment of safety cases consisting of documentation to justify safety during the design, construction, manufacture, commissioning, operation, and decommissioning phases of the installation. This document also gives the earliest definition and purpose of a safety case – ‘to justify safety’, and some direction for the focus of the justification, ‘… during design, construction, manufacture, commissioning and decommissioning phases of the installation.’ Wow!! This is pretty comprehensive and has been the forerunner of many of the UK standards and requirements for safety cases. Modern use of Safety Language The UK Engineering Council has published a set of guidelines on risk issues [Engineering Council 1993]; this is not a particularly new document, but it does contain significant information on public awareness of risk. It cites that ‘…engineers should learn about how the public perceives risk and makes risk decisions. Conversely, engineers should inform the public about how the profession perceives risks and makes risk decisions. Modern use of safety language is about communicating about risk and safety. This is most important for governments and policy developers. Notably, the UK and Australian governments have supported research into how the public perceives risk and safety issues [Cabinet Office 2002], [Botterill & Mazur 2004]. These have suggested that the language of risk is used to cover a wide range of types of issues: 1. Direct threats from terrorism 2. Safety issues (BSE, MMR, flooding) 3. Risks to the environment 4. Transfer of risk to and from the private sector 5. Risk of damage to a government’s reputation. The language itself can also be confusing. People often give different meanings to key terms, so it is important to develop a commonly understood safety language that can be understood by those outside and inside the government [Cabinet Office 2002]. These comments are from the UK government, and the Australian government is in similar agreement. Risk is central to policy response to drought and quarantine restrictions; terms like ‘risk management’ and ‘acceptable levels of protection’ assume a degree of understanding of the concept of risk, risk acceptance, and how risk is measured. These are bold assumptions. Understanding how stakeholders and the broader community perceive risk will assist policymakers in developing better policies and more effective means for communicating in areas involving risk and safety management [Botterill & Mazur 2004]. Development of the Safety Case in the UK In the UK, the legislative requirement for a safety case has moved through various hazardous employment fields. Usually, this comes about after a public inquiry into a dreadful accident in each field. The timetable of the safety case’s progress through the UK industry is given in Table 2.1. Details of the incident are generally recognized as justifications. The Aircraft and Armament Evaluation Establishment (A&AEE) document cited in table 2.1 [A&AEE 1992] gives a further brief overview of a definition of the purpose of the safety case: a. Identify the potential hazards that could arise b. Categorize the effects of those hazards c. Quantify the probability of those hazards d. Justify the acceptance of those hazards or identify design changes needed, e. Provide a permanent record of all the above to be updated throughout life. It should be noted that the emphasis in the safety case descriptions so far is based on a prediction of future behavior and identifying potential hazards. This is generally consistent with the ongoing use of safety cases in the UK, although there is sometimes the need for the production of a retrospective safety case in some situations. The Progress of the Safety Case in the UK Nuclear Windscale 1957. Fuel fire was caused by errors during Wigner energy release. There were no direct fatalities, but there was a substantial release of radioactive material. Nuclear Installations Act 1965 Chemical Flixborough 1974. Uncontrolled modifications to a chemical process line led to the pipeline rupturing and a huge explosion, killing 27 people. Control of Industrial Major Hazards (CIMAH) 1984; and Control of Major Accident Hazards (COMAH) 1999. Rail Transport Kings Cross 1987. Fire started underneath an escalator, which rapidly engulfed the main exit routes. 31 people killed Railways (Safety Case) Regulations 2000. Petrochemical Piper Alpha 1988. Small initial explosion of condensate pump led to catastrophic fire killing 167 people and costing £2000 million. Offshore Installations (Safety Case) Regulations 1992. Defence Various, probably including 27 Hawk aircraft lost from 1980 to 1989; 23 Tornado aircraft lost from 1980 to 1989; 24 Sea King helicopters lost from 1980 to 1989. Outline of Requirements for the Provision of a Safety Case by the Design Authority, A&AEE, 1992; and Safety Management Requirements for Defence Systems 00:56 1991 Development of Safety Reports in the US In the USA, the driving forces for safety are nuclear and space programs. The phrase ‘safety case’ is not widely used, which may come as a surprise when noting the importance of litigation in the USA. A variety of phrases and terms are employed, and taking national aeronautics and space administration as an example, the national aeronautics and space administration Safety Manual Procedural requirements [NASA 2000] cite: Safety Analysis Report (SAR). A safety report of considerable detail prepared by or for the program detailing the safety features of a particular [nuclear] system or source. And Mission Safety Evaluation (MSE) Report. A formal report for a specified mission to document the independent safety evaluation of safety risk factors that represent a change, or potential change, to the risk baseline of the program. national aeronautics and space administration is also involved in the US Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), set up in 1975 under a memorandum of agreement between national aeronautics and space administration and the FAA. Its purpose is to collect, analyze, and respond to voluntarily submitted historical reports of safety-related incidents, with the goal of reducing the likelihood of future aviation accidents. The aviation safety report system specifies an Aviation Safety Report Form, and there are different versions depending on your particular role in aviation. The version for pilots is shown on the following pages. Whilst this is a reporting system based on incidents that have happened, that is, it does not deal with the prediction of incidents; the document layout is a useful example of the sorts of details required in a simple safety report. However, there are some extremely important concepts within it, which will be discussed in later chapters. The Occupational Health and Safety Agency (OSHA) is the primary force behind employee safety in the USA. Its main Act of 1970 [Note to UK readers was obviously in advance of the UK Health and Safety at Work Act of 1974] cites several documents for recording safety matters. In the Act, the US Congress declared it to be the Act’s purpose and policy ‘ … to assure so far as possible every working man and woman in the Nation safe and healthful working conditions and to preserve our human resources’. It encourages each State to assume the fullest responsibility for the administration and enforcement of their occupational and health laws. In order to accomplish this, each State, if they desire to, may submit a State Plan for the development and enforcement of their occupational health and safety standards. Safety management has developed over time in the occupational arena, and it was in 1989 when occupational safety and health administration issued recommended guidelines for the effective management and protection of worker safety and health [OSHA 1989]. These are still applied today. In summary, the general points are: Employers are advised and encouraged to institute and maintain in their establishments a (safety) program that provides adequate systematic policies, procedures, and practices to protect their employees from and allow them to recognize job-related safety and health hazards. An effective program includes provisions for the systematic identification, evaluation, and prevention or control of general workplace hazards, specific job hazards, and potential hazards that may arise from foreseeable conditions. Although compliance with the law, including specific occupational safety and health administration standards, is an important objective, an effective program looks beyond specific requirements of the law to address all hazards. It will seek to prevent injuries and illnesses, whether or not compliance is at issue. The extent to which the program is described in writing is less important than how effective it is in practice. As the size of a worksite or the complexity of a hazardous operation increases, however, the need for written guidance increases to ensure clear communication of policies and priorities as well as a consistent and fair application of rules. Summary It is interesting to note that many of the US occupational safety and health administration points could easily be referring to a ‘safety case’ from the UK. Once again, as in the summary of Chapter 1, the underlying concepts are strongly comparable across the nations and do not appear to contrast significantly at all. The predictive aspects are present, and the idea of forming a written record is also noted. The only difference, it seems, is the label attached to the documents.