Title: Ten Questions About Human Error A New View Of Human Factors And System Safety Chapter 5 Author(s): Sidney W. A. Dekker Category: Analysis, Human, Factors, Errors Tags: human, error, factors, accident If You Lose Situation Awareness, What Replaces It? The hindsight bias has ways of getting entrenched in human factors thinking. One such way is our vocabulary. "Losing situation awareness" or "deficient situation awareness" have become legitimate characterizations of cases where people did not exactly know where they were or what was going on around them. In many applied as well as some scientific settings, it is acceptable to submit "loss of situation awareness" as an explanation for why people ended up where they should not have ended up, or why they did what they, in hindsight, should not have done. Navigational incidents and accidents in transportation represent one category of cases where the temptation to rely on situation awareness as an elucidatory construct appears irresistible. If people end up where they should not, or where they did not intend to end up, it is easy to see that as a deficient awareness of the cues and indications around them. It is easy to blame a loss of situation awareness. One such accident happened to the Royal Majesty, a cruise ship that was sailing from Bermuda to Boston in the Summer of 1995. It had more than 1,000 people onboard. Instead of Boston, the Royal Majesty ended up on a sandbank close to the Massachusetts shore. Without the crew noticing, it had drifted 17 miles off course during a day and a half of sailing (see Fig. 5.1). Investigators discovered afterward that the ship's autopilot had defaulted to DR (Dead Reckoning) mode (from NAV, or Navigation mode) shortly after departure. DR mode does not compensate for the effects of wind and other drift (waves, currents), which NAV mode does. A northeasterly wind pushed the ship steadily off its course, to the side of its intended track. The U.S. National Transportation Safety Board investigation into the accident judged that "despite repeated indications, the crew failed to recognize numerous opportunities to detect that the vessel had drifted off track" (NTSB, 1995, p. 34). But "numerous opportunities" to detect the nature of the real situation become clear only in hindsight. With hindsight, once we know the outcome, it becomes easy to pick out exactly those clues and indications that would have shown people where they were actually headed. If only they had focused on this piece of data, or put less confidence in that indication, or had invested just a little more energy in examining this anomaly, then they would have seen that they were going in the wrong direction. In this sense, situation awareness is a highly functional or adaptive term for us, for those struggling to come to terms with the rubble of a navigational accident. Situation awareness is a notation that assists us in organizing the evidence avail­ able to people at the time, and can provide a starting point for understaning why this evidence was looked at differently, or not at all, by those people. Unfortunately, we hardly ever push ourselves to such understand­ ing. Loss of situation awareness is accepted as sufficient explanation too quickly too often, and in those cases amounts to nothing more than saying human error under a fancy new label. The kinds of notations that are popular in various parts of the situation-awareness literature are one indication that we quickly stop investigating, researching any further, once we have found human error under that new guise. Venn-type diagrams, for example, can point out the mismatch between actual and ideal situation awareness. They illustrate the difference between what people were aware of in a particular situation, and what they could (or should) ideally have been aware of (see Fig. 5.2). Once we have found a mismatch between what we now know about the situation (the large circle) and what people back then apparently knew about it (the small one), that in itself is explanation enough. They did not know, but they could or should have known. This does not apply only in retrospect, by the way. Even design problems can be clarified through this notation, and per­ formance predictions can be made on its basis. When the aim is designing for situation awareness, the Venn diagram can show what people should pick up in a given setting, versus what they are likely to actually pick up. In both cases, awareness is a relationship between that which is objectively available to people in the outside world on the one hand, and what they take in, or understand about it, on the other. Terms such as deficient situation awareness or loss of situation awareness confirm human factors' depenence on a kind of subtractive model of awareness. The Venn diagram notation can also be expressed in an equation that reflects this: Loss of SA= /(large circle - small circle) (1) In Equation 1, "loss of SA" equals "deficient SA" and SA stands for situation awareness. This also reveals the continuing normativist bias in our understanding of human performance. Normativist theories aim to explain mental processes by reference to ideals or normative standards that describe optimal strategies. The large Venn circle is the norm, the standard, the ideal. Situation awareness is explained by reference to that ideal: Actual situation awareness is a subtraction from that ideal, a shortfall, a deficit, indeed, a "loss." Equation 2 becomes: Loss of SA = /(what I know now - what you knew then) (2) Loss of situation awareness, in other words, is the difference between what I know about a situation now (especially the bits highlighted by hindsight) and what somebody else apparently knew about that situation then. Interestingly, situation awareness is nothing by itself, then. It can only be expressed as a relative, normativist function, for example, the difference between what people apparently knew back then versus what they could or should have known (or what we know now). Other than highlighting the mismatch between the large and the little circle in a Venn diagram, other than revealing the elements that were not seen but could or should have been seen and understood, there is little there. Discourse and research around situation awareness may so far have shed little light on the actual processes of attentional dynamics. Rather, situation awareness has given us a new normativist lexicon that provides large, comprehensive notations for perplexing data (How could they not have noticed? Well, they lost SA). Sit­ uation awareness has legitimized the proliferation of the hindsight bias under the pretext of adding to the knowledge base. None of this may really help our understanding of awareness in complex dynamic situations, instead truncating deeper research, and shortchanging real insight. THE MIND-MATTER PROBLEM Discourse about situation awareness is a modern installment of an ancient debate in philosophy and psychology, about the relationship between matter and mind. Surely one of the most vexing problems, the coupling between matter and mind, has occupied centuries of thinkers. How is it that we get data from the outside world inside our minds? What are the processes by which this happens? And how can the products of these processes be so divergent (I see other things than you, or other things than I saw yesterday)? All psychological theories, including those of situation awareness, implicitly or explicitly choose a position relative to the mindmatter problem. Virtually all theories of situation awareness rely on the idea of correspondence—a match, or correlation, between an external world of stimuli (elements) and an internal world of mental representations (which gives meaning to those stimuli). The relationship between matter and mind, in other words, is one of letting the mind create a mirror, a mental simile, of matter on the outside. This allows a further elaboration of the Venn diagram notation: Instead of "ideal" versus "actual" situation awareness, the captions of the circles in the diagram could read "matter" (the large circle) and "mind" (the little circle). Situation awareness is the difference between what is out there in the material world (matter) and what the observer sees or understands (mind). Equation 1 can be rewritten as Equation 3: Loss of SA = /(matter - mind) (3) Equation 3 describes how a loss of situation awareness, or deficient situation awareness, is a function of whatever was in the mind subtracted from what was available matter. The portion of matter that did not make it into mind is lost, it is deficient awareness. Such thinking, of course, is profoundly Cartesian. It separates mind from matter as if they are distinct entities: a res cogitans and a res extensa. Both exist as separate essentials of our universe, and one serves as the echo, or imitate, of the other. One problem of such dualism lies, of course, in the assumptions it makes. An important assumption is what Feyerabend called the "autonomy principle" (see chap. 3): that facts exist in some objective world, equally accessible to all observers. The autonomy principle is what allows researchers to draw the large circle of the Venn diagram: It consists of matter available to, as well as independent from, any observer, whose awareness of that matter takes the form of an internal simile. This assumption is heavily contested by radical empiricists. Is there really a separation between resextensa and res cogitans? Can we look at matter as something "out there," as something idependent of (the minds of) observers, as something that is open to enter the awareness of anyone? If the autonomy principle is right, then deficient situation awareness is a result of the actual SA Venn circle being too small, or misdirected relative to the large (ideal SA) Venn circle. But if you lose situation awareness, what replaces it? No theories of cognition today can easily account for a mental vacuum, for empty-headedness. Rather, people always form an understanding of the situation unfolding around them, even if this understanding can, in hindsight, be shown to have diverged from the actual state of affairs. This does not mean that this mismatch has any relevance in explaining human performance at the time. For people doing work in a situated context, there is seldom a mismatch, if ever. Performance is driven by the desire to construct plausible, coherent accounts, a good story of what is going on. Weick (1995) reminded us that such sensemaking is not about accuracy, about achieving an accurate mapping between some objective, outside world and an inner representation of that world. What matters to people is not to produce a precise internalized simile of an outside situation, but to account for their sensory experiences in a way that supports action and goal achievement. This converts the challenge of understanding situation awareness. From studying the mapping accuracy between an external and internal world, it requires the investigation of why people thought they were in the right place, or had the right assessment of the situation around them. What made that so? The adequacy or accuracy of an insider's representation of the situation cannot be called into question: It is what counts for him or her, and it is that which drives further action in that situation. The internal, subjective world is the only one that exists. If there is an objective, external reality, we could not know it. Getting Lost at the Airport Let us now turn to a simple case, to see how these things play out. Runway incursions (aircraft taxiing onto runways for which they did not have a clearance) are an acute category of such cases in transportation today. Runway incursions are seen as a serious and growing safety problem worldwide, especially at large, controlled airports (where air-traffic control organizes and directs traffic movements). Hundreds of incursions occur every year, some leading to fatal accidents. Apart from straying onto a runway without a clearance, the risk of colliding with something else at an airport is consid­ erable. Airports are tight and dynamic concentrations of cars, buses, carts, people, trucks, trucks plus aircraft, and aircraft, all moving at speeds varying from a few knots to hundreds of knots. (And then fog can settle over all of that). The number of things to hit is much larger on the ground than it is in the air, and the proximity to those things is much closer. And because of the layout of taxiways and ramps, navigating an aircraft across an airport can be considerably more difficult than navigating it in flight. When runway incursions occur, it can be tempting to blame a loss of situ­ ation awareness. Here is one such case, not a runway incursion, but a taxiway incursion. This case is illustrative not only because it is relatively simple, but also because all regulations had been followed in the design and layout of the airport. Safety cases had been conducted for the airport, and it had been certified as compliant with all relevant rules. Incidents in such an otherwise safe system can happen even when everybody follows the rules. This incident happened at Stockholm Arlanda (the international airport) in Oc­ tober 2002. A Boeing 737 had landed on runway 26 (the opposite of runway 08, which can be seen in Fig. 5.3) and was directed by air traffic control to taxi to its gate via taxiways ZN and Z (called "Zulu November" and "Zulu," in aviation speak). The reason for taking ZN was that a tow truck with an aircraft was coming from the other direction. It had been cleared to use ZP (Zulu Papa) and then to turn right onto taxiway X (X-ray). But the 737 did not take ZN. To the horror of the tow truck driver, it carried on following ZP instead, almost straight into the tow truck. The pilots saw the truck in time, however, and managed to stop. The truck driver had to push his aircraft backward in order to clear up the jam. Did the pilots lose situation awareness? Was their situation awareness deficient? There were signs pointing out where taxiway ZN ran, and those could be seen from the cockpit. Why did the crew not take these cues into account when coming off the runway? Such questions consistently pull us toward the position of retrospective outsider, looking down onto the developing situation from a God's-eye point of view. From there we can see the mismatch grow between where people were and where they thought they were. From there we can easily draw the circles of the Venn diagram, pointing out a deficiency or a shortcoming in the awareness of the people in question. But none of that explains much. The mystery of the matter-mind problem is not going to go away just because we say that other people did not see what we now know they should have seen. The challenge is to try to understand why the crew of the 737 thought that they were right—that they were doing exactly what air-traffic control had told them to do: follow taxiway ZN to Z. The commit­ ment of an antidualist position is to try to see the world through the eyes of the protagonists, as there is no other valid perspective. The challenge with navigational incidents, indeed, is not to point out that people were not in the spot they thought they were, but to explain why they thought they were right. The challenge is to begin to understand on the basis of what cues people (thought) they knew where they were. The first clue can be found in the response of the 737 crew after they had been reminded by the tower to follow ZN (they had now stopped, facing the tow truck head-on). 'Yeah, it's the chart here that's a little strange," said one of the pilots (Statens Haverikommision, 2003, p. 8). If there was a mis­ match, it was not between the actual world and the crew's model of that world. Rather, there was a mismatch between the chart in the cockpit and the actual airport layout. As can be seen in Fig. 5.3, the taxiway layout contained a little island, or roundabout, between taxiways Zulu and X-ray. ZN and ZP were the little bits going between X-ray to Zulu, around the round­ about. But the chart available in the cockpit had no little island on it. It showed no roundabout (see Fig. 5.4). Even here, no rules had been broken. The airport layout had recently changed (with the addition of the little roundabout) in connection with the construction of a new terminal pier. It takes time for the various charts to be updated, and this simply had not happened yet at the company of the crew in question. Still, how could the crew of the 737 have ended up on the wrong side of that area (ZP instead of ZN), whether there was an island shown on their charts or not? Figure 5.5 contains more clues. It shows the roundabout from the height of a car (which is lower than a 737 cockpit, but from the same direction as an aircraft coming off of runway 26). The crew in question went left of the roundabout, where it should have gone right. The roundabout is covered in snow, which makes it inseparable from the other (real) islands separating taxiways Zulu and X-ray. These other islands consist of grass, whereas the roundabout, with a diameter of about 20 meters, is the same tarmac as that of the taxiways. Shuffle snow onto all of them, however, and they look indistinguishable. The roundabout is no longer a circle painted on the tarmac: It is an island like all others. Without a roundabout on the cockpit chart, there is only one plausible explanation for what the island in Fig. 5.5 ahead of the aircraft is: It must be the grassy island to the right of taxiway ZN. In other words, the crew knew where they were, based on the cues and indications available to them, and based on what these cues plausibly added up to. The signage, even though it breaks no rules either, does not help. Taxi­ way signs are among the most confusing directors in the world of aviation, and they are terribly hard to turn into a reasonable representation of the taxiway system they are supposed to help people navigate on. The sign visible from the direction of the Boeing 737 is enlarged in Fig. 5.6. The black part of the sign is the position part (this indicates what taxiway it is), and the yellow part is the direction part: This taxiway (ZN) will lead to taxiway Z, which happens to run at about a right angle across ZN. These signs are placed to the left of the taxiway they belong to. In other words, the ZN taxiway is on the right of the sign, not on the left. But put the sign in the con­ text of Fig. 5.5, and things become more ambiguous. The black ZN part is now leaning toward the left side of the roundabout, not the right side. Yet the ZN part belongs to the piece of tarmac on the right of the roundabout. The crew never saw as such. For them, given their chart, the roundabout was the island to the right of ZN. Why not swap the black ZN and the yellow Z parts? Current rules for taxi­ way signage will not allow it (rules can indeed stifle innovation and invest­ ments in safety). And not all airports comply to this religiously either. There may be exceptions when there is no room or when visibility of the sign would be obstructed if placed on the left side. To make things worse, regulations state that taxiway signs leading to a runway need to be placed on both sides of the taxiway. In those cases, the black parts of the signs are often actually adjacent to the taxiway, and not removed from it, as in Fig. 5.5. Against the background of such ambiguity, few pilots actually know or remember that taxiway signs are supposed to be on the left side of the taxiway they belong to. In fact, very little time in pilot training is used to get pilots to learn to navigate around airports, if any. It is a peripheral activity, a small portion of mundane, pedestrian work that merely leads up to and concludes the real work: flying from A to B. When rolling off the runway, and going to taxiway Zulu and then to their gate, this crew knew where they were. Their indications (cockpit chart, snow-covered island, taxiway sign) compiled into a plausible story: ZN, their assigned route, was the one to the left of the island, and that was the one they were going to take. Until they ran into a tow truck, that is. But nobody in this case lost situation awareness. The pilots lost nothing. Based on the combination of cues and indications observable by them at the time, they had a plausible story of where they were. Even if a mismatch can be shown between how the pilots saw their sit­ uation and how retrospective, outside observers now see that situation, this has no bearing on understanding how the pilots made sense of their world at the time. Seeing situation awareness as a measure of the accuracy of correspondence between some outer world and an inner representation carries with it a number of irresolvable problems that have always been connected to such a dualist position. Taking the mind-matter problem apart by separating the two means that the theory needs to connect the two again. Theories of situation awareness typically rely on a combination of two schools in psychological thought to reconstitute this tie, to make this bridge. One is empiricism, a traditional school in psychology that makes claims on how knowledge is chiefly, if not uniquely, based on experience. The second is the information-processing school in cognitive psychology, still popular in large areas of human factors. None of these systems of thought, however, are particularly successful in solving the really hard questions about situa­ tion awareness, and may in fact be misleading in certain respects. We look at both of them in turn here. Once that is done, the chapter briefly develops the counterposition on the mind-matter question: an antidualist one (as related to situation awareness). This position is worked out further in the rest of this chapter, using the Royal Majesty case as an example. EMPIRICISM AND THE PERCEPTION OF ELEMENTS Most theories of situation awareness actually leave the processes by which matter makes it into mind to the imagination. A common denominator, however, appears to be the perception of elements in the environment. Elements are the starting point of perceptual and meaning-making processes. It is on the basis of these elements that we gradually build up an understanding of the situation, by processing such elementary stimulus informa­ tion through multiple stages of consciousness or awareness ("levels of SA"). Theories of situation awareness borrow from empiricism (particularly Brit­ ish empiricism), which assumes that the organized character and the meaningfulness of our perceptual world are achieved by matching incoming stimuli with prior experience through a process called association. In other words, the world as we experience it is disjointed (consisting of elements) except when mediated by previously stored knowledge. Correspondence between mind and matter is made by linking incoming impressions through earlier associations. Empiricism in its pure form is nothing more than saying that the major source of knowledge is experience, that we do not know about the world except through making contact with that world with our sensory organs. Among Greek philosophers around the 5th century B.C., empiricism was accepted as a guide to epistemology, as a way of understanding the origin of knowledge. Questions already arose, however, on whether all psychic life could be reduced to sensations. Did the mind have a role to play at all in turning perceptual impressions into meaningful percepts? The studies of perception by Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) would come to suggest that the mind had a major role, even though he himself left the implications of his findings up to other theoreticians. Studying the eyeball, Kepler found that it actually projects an inverted image on the retina at the back. Descartes, himself dissecting the eye of a bull to see what image it would produce, saw the same thing. If the eye inverts the world, how can we see it the right way up? There was no choice but to appeal to mental processing. Not only is the image inverted, it is also two-dimensional, and it is cast onto the backs of two eyes, not one. How does all that get reconciled in a single coherent, upright percept? The experiments boosted the notion of impoverished, meaning-deprived stimuli entering our sensory organs, in need of some serious mental processing work from there on. Further credence to the perception of elements was given by the 19th-century discovery of photoreceptors in the human eye. This mosaic of retinal receptors appeared to chunk up any visual percept coming into the eyeball. The resulting fragmented neural signals had to be sent up the perceptual pathway in the brain for further processing and scene restoration. British empiricists such as John Locke (1632-1704) and George Berke­ ley (1685-1753), though not privy to 19th-century findings, were confronted with the same epistemological problems that their Greek predecessors had struggled with. Rather than knowledge being innate, or the chief result of reasoning (as claimed by rationalists of that time), what role did experience have in creating knowledge? Berkeley, for example, wrestled with the problem of depth perception (not a negligible problem when it comes to situation awareness). How do we know where we are in space, in relation to objects around us? Distance perception, to Berkeley, though created through experience, was itself not an immediate experience. Rather, distance and depth are additional aspects of visual data that we learn about through combinations of visual, auditory, and tactile experiences. We understand distance and depth in current scenes by associating incoming visual data with these earlier experiences. Berkeley reduced the problem of space perception to more primitive psychological experiences, decomposing the perception of distance and magnitude into constituent perceptual elements and processes (e.g., lenticular accommodation, blurring of focus) . Such deconstruction of complex, intertwined psychological processes into elementary stimuli turned out to be a useful tactic. It encouraged many after him, among them Wilhelm Wundt and latter-day situation-awareness theorists, to analyze other experiences in terms of elements as well. Interestingly, neither all prehistoric empiricists nor all British empiricists could be called dualists in the same way that situation-awareness theorists can be. Protagoras, a contemporary of Plato around 430 B.C., had already said that "man is the measure of all things." An individual's perception is true to him, and cannot be proven untrue (or inferior or superior) by some other individual. Today's theories of situation awareness, with their emphasis on the accuracy of the mapping between matter and mind, are very much into inferiority and superiority (deficient SA vs. good SA) as something that can be objectively judged. This would not have worked for some of the British empiricists either. To Berkeley, who disagreed with earlier characterizations of an inner versus an outer world, people can actually never know anything but their experiences. The world is a plausible but unproved hypothesis. In fact, it is a fundamentally untestable hypothesis, because we can only know our own experience. Like Protagoras before him, Berkeley would not have put much stock in claims of the possibility of superior or ideal situation awareness, as such a thing is logically impossible. There are no superlatives when it comes to knowledge through experience. For Berkeley too, this meant that even if there is an objective world out there (the large circle in the Venn diagram), we could never know it. It also meant that any characteriza­ tion of such an objective world with the aim of understanding somebody's perception, somebody's situation awareness, would have been nonsense. Experiments, Empiricism, and Situation Awareness Wilhelm Wundt is credited with founding the first psychological laboratory in the world at the University of Leipzig in the late 1870s. The aim of his laboratory was to study mental functioning by deconstructing it into separate elements. These could then be combined to understand perceptions, ideas, and other associations. Wundt's argument was simple and compelling, and versions of it are still used in psychological method debates today. Although the empirical method had been developing all around psychology, it was still occupied with grand questions of consciousness, soul, and destiny, and it tried to gain access to these issues through introspection and rationalism. Wundt argued that these were questions that should perhaps be asked at the logical end point of psychology, but not at the beginning. Psychology should learn to crawl before trying to walk. This justified the appeal of the elementarist approach: chopping the mind and its stimuli up into minute components, and studying them one by one. But how to study them? Centuries before, Descartes had argued that mind and matter not only were entirely separate, but should be studied using different methods as well. Matter should be investigated using methods from natural science (i.e., the experiment), whereas mind should be examined through proesses of meditation, or introspection. Wundt did both. In fact, he combined the natural science tradition with the introspective one, molding them into a novel brand of psychological experimentation that still governs much of human factors research to this day. Relying on complicated sets of stimuli, Wundt investigated sensation and perception, attention, feeling, and association. Using intricate measurements of reaction times, the Leipzig laboratory hoped they would one day be able to achieve a chronometry of mind (which was not long thereafter dismissed as infeasible). Rather than just counting on quantitative experimental outcomes, Wundt asked his subjects to engage in introspection, to reflect on what had happened inside their minds during the trials. Wundt's introspection was significantly more evolved and demanding than the experimental "report" psychologists ask their subjects for today. Introspection was a skill that required serious preparation and expertise, because the criteria for gaining successful access to the elementary makeup of mind were set very high. As a result, Wundt mostly used his assistants. Realizing that the contents of awareness are in constant flux, Wundt produced rigid rules for the proper application of introspection: (a) The observer, if at all possible, must be in a position to determine when the process is to be introduced; (b) he or she must be in a state of "strained attention"; (c) the observation must be capable of being repeated several times; (d) the conditions of the experiment must be such that they are capable of variation through introduction or elimination of certain stimuli and through variation of the strength and quality of the stimuli. Wundt thus imposed experimental rigor and control on introspection. Similar introspective rigor, though different in some details and prescriptions, is applied in various methods for studying situation awareness today. Some techniques involve blanking or freezing of displays, with researchers then going in to elicit what participants remember about the scene. This requires active introspection. Wundt would have been fascinated, and he probably would have had a thing or two to say about the experimental protocol. If subjects are not allowed to say when the blanking or freezing is to be introduced, for example (Wundt's first rule), how does that compromise their ability to introspect? In fact, the blanking of displays and handing out a situation-awareness questionnaire is more akin to the Wurzburg school of experimental psychology that started to compete with Wundt in the late 19th century. The Wurzburgers pursued "systematic experimental introspection" by having subjects pursue complex tasks that involved thinking, judging, and remembering. They would then have their subjects render a retrospective report of their experiences during the original operation. The whole experience had to be described time period by time period, thus chunking it up. In contrast to Wundt, and like situationawareness research participants today, Wurzburg subjects did not know in advance what they were going to have to introspect. Others today disagree with Descartes' original exhortation and remain fearful of the subjectivist nature of introspection. They favor the use of clever scenarios in which the outcome, or behavioral performance of peple, will reveal what they understood the situation to be. This is claimed to be more of a natural science approach that stays away from the need to introspect. It relies on objective performance indicators instead. Such an approach to studying situation awareness could be construed as neobehav­ iorist, as it equates the study of behavior with the study of consciousness. Mental states are not themselves the object of investigation: Performance is. If desired, such performance can faintly hint at the contents of mind (situation awareness). But that itself is not the aim; it cannot be, because through such pursuits psychology (and human factors) would descend into subjectivism and ridicule. Watson, the great proponent of behaviorism, would himself have argued along these lines. Additional arguments in favor of performance-oriented approaches include the assertation that introspection cannot possibly test the contents of awareness, as it necessarily appeals to a situation or stimulus from the past. The situation on which people are asked to reflect has already disappeared. Introspection thus simply probes people's memory. Indeed, if you want to study situation awareness, how can you take away the "situation" by blanking or freezing their world, and still hope you have relevant "awareness" left to investigate by introspection? Wundt, as well as many of today's situation awareness researchers, may in part have been studying memory, rather than the contents of consciousness. Wundt was, and still remains, one of the chief representatives of the elementarist orientation, pioneered by Berkeley centuries before, and per­ petuated in modern theories of situation awareness. But if we perceive elements, if the eyeball deals in two-dimensional, fragmented, inverted, meaning-deprived stimuli, then how does order in our perceptual experience come about? What theory can account for our ability to see coherent scenes, objects? The empiricist answer of association is one way of achieving such order, of creating such interelementary connections and meaning. Order is an end product, it is the output of mental or cognitive work. This is also the essence of information processing, the school of thought in cognitive psychology that accompanied and all but colonized human factors since its inception during the closing days of the Second World War. Meaning and perceptual order are the end result of an internal trade in representations, representations that get increasingly filled out and meaningful as a result of processing in the mind. INFORMATION PROCESSING Information processing did not follow neatly on empiricism, nor did it accompany the initial surge in psychological experimentation. Wundt's introspection did not immediately fuel the development of theoretical substance to fill the gap between elementary matter and the mind's perception of it. Rather, it triggered an anti-subjectivist response that would ban the study of mind and mental processes for decades to come, especially in North America. John Watson, a young psychologist, introduced psychology to the idea of behaviorism in 1913, and aimed to conquer psychology as a purely objective branch of natural science. Introspection was to be disqualified, and any references to or investigations of consciousness were proscribed. The introspective method was seen as unreliable and unscientific, and psychologists had to turn their focus exclusively to phenomena that could be registered and described objectively by independent observers. This meant that introspection had to be replaced by tightly controlled experiments that varied subtle combinations of rewards and punishments in order to bait organisms (anything from mice to pigeons to humans) into particular behaviors over others. The outcome of such experiments was there for all to see, with no need for introspection. Behaviorism became an early 20th-century embodiment of the Baconian ideal of universal control, this time reflected in a late Industrial Revolution obsession with manipulative technology and domination. It appealed enormously to an optimistic, pragmatic, rapidly developing, and result-oriented North America. Laws extracted from simple experimental settings were thought to carry over to more complex settings and to more experiential phenomena as well, including imagery, thinking, and emotions. Behaviorism was thus fundamentally nomothetic: deriving general laws thought to be applicable across people and settings. All human expressions, including art and religion, were reduced to no more than conditioned responses. Behaviorism turned psychology into something wonderfully Newtonian: a schedule of stimuli and responses, of mechanistic, predictable, and changeable couplings between inputs and outputs. The only legitimate characteriza­ tion of psychology and mental life was one that conformed to the Newtonian framework of classical physics, and abided by its laws of action and reaction. Then continuing airworthines management exposition the Second World War, and the behaviorist bubble was deflated. No matter how clever a system of rewards and punishments psychologists set up, radar operators monitoring for German aircraft intruding into Britain across the Channel would still lose their vigilance over time. They would still have difficulty distinguishing signals from noise, independent of the possible penalties. Pilots would get controls mixed up, and radio operators were evidently limited in their ability to hold information in their heads while getting ready for the next transmission. Where was behaviorism? It could not answer to the new pragmatic appeals. Thus continuing airworthines management exposition the first cognitive revolution. The cognitive revolution reintroduced mind as a legitimate object of study. Rather than manipulating the effect of stimuli on overt responses, it concerned itself with "meaning" as the central concept of psychology. Its aim was, as Bruner (1990) recalled, to discover and describe meanings that people created out of their encounters with the world, and then to propose hypotheses for what meaning-making processes were involved. The very metaphors, however, that legitimized the reintroduction of the study of mind also began to immediately corrupt it. The first cognitive revolution fragmented and became overly technicalized. The radio and the computer, two technologies accelerated by develop­ ments during the Second World War, quickly captured the imagination of those once again studying mental processes. These were formidable similes of mind, able to mechanistically fill the black box (which behaviorism had kept shut) between stimulus and response. The innards of a radio showed filters, channels, and limited capacities through which information flowed. Not much later, all those words appeared in cognitive psy­ chology. Now the mind had filters, channels, and limited capacities too. The computer was even better, containing a working memory, a long-term memory, various forms of storage, input and output, and decision modules. It did not take long for these terms, too, to appear in the psychological lexicon. What seemed to matter most was the ability to quantify and compute mental functioning. Information theory, for example, could explain how elementary stimuli (bits) would flow through processing channels to produce responses. A processed stimulus was deemed informative if it reduced alternative choices, whether the stimulus had to do with Faust or with a digit from a statistical table. As Bruner (1990) recollected, computability became the necessary and sufficient criterion for cognitive theories. Mind was equated to program. Through these metaphors, the "construction of meaning" quickly became the "processing of information." Newton and Descartes simply would not let go. Once again, psychology was reduced to mechanical components and linkages, and exchanges of energy between and along them. Testing the various components (sensory store, memory, decision making) in endless series of fractionalized laboratory experiments, psychologists hoped, and many are still hoping, that more of the same will eventually add up to something different, that profound insight into the workings of the whole will magically emerge from the study of constituent components. The Mechanization of Mind Information processing has been a profoundly Newtonian-Cartesian answer to the mind-matter problem. It is the ultimate mechanization of mind. The basic idea is that the human (mind) is an information processor that takes in stimuli from the outside world, and gradually makes sense of those stimuli by combining them with things already stored in the mind. For example, I see the features of a face, but through coupling them to what I have in long-term memory, I recognize the face as that of my youngest son. Information processing is loyal to the biological-psychological model that sees the matter-mind connection as a physiologically identifiable flow of neuronal energy from periphery to center (from eyeball to cortex), along various nerve pathways. The information-processing pathway of typical models mimics this flow, by taking a stimulus and pushing it through various stages of processing, adding more meaning the entire time. Once the processing system has understood what the stimulus means (or stimuli mean) can an appropriate response be generated (through a backflow from center to periphery, brain to limbs) that in turn creates more (new) stimuli to process. The Newtonian as well as dualist intimations of the information-processing model are a heartening sight for those with Cartesian anxiety. Thanks to the biological model underneath it, the mind-matter problem is one of a Newtonian transfer (conversion as well as conservation) of energy at all kinds of levels (from photonic energy to nerve impulses, from chemical releases to electrical stimulation, from stimulus to response at the over­ all organismic level). Both Descartes and Newton can be recognized in the componential explanation of mental functioning (memory, e.g., is typically parsed up in iconic memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory): End-products of mental processing can be exhaustively explained on the basis of interactions between these and other components. Finally of course, information processing is mentalist: It neatly separates res cogitans from resextensa by studying what happens in the mind entirely separately from what happens in the world. The world is a mere adjunct, truly a res extensa, employed solely to lob the next stimulus at the mind (which is where the really interesting processes take place). The information-processing model works marvelously for the simple laboratory experiments that brought it to life. Laboratory studies of perception, decision making, and reaction time reduce stimuli to single snapshots, fired off at the human processing mechanism as one-stop triggers. The Wundtian idea of awareness as a continually flowing phenomenon is artificially reduced, chunked up and frozen by the very stimuli that subjects are to become aware of. Such dehumanization of the settings in which perception takes place, as well as of the models by which such perception comes about, has given rise to considerable critique. If people are seen to be adding meaning to impoverished, elementary stimuli, then this is because they are given impoverished, elementary, meaningless stimuli in their laboratory tasks! None of that says anything about natural perception or the processes by which people perceive or construct meaning in actual settings. The information-processing model may be true (though even that is judged as unlikely by most), but only for the constrained, Spartan laboratory settings that keep cognition in captivity. If people are seen to struggle in their interpretation of elements, then this may have something to do with the elementary stimuli given to them. Even Wundt was not without detractors in this respect. The Gestalt movement was launched in part as a response or protest to Wundtian elementarism. Gestaltists claimed that we actually perceive meaningful wholes, that we immediately experience those wholes. We cannot help but see these patterns, these wholes. Max Wertheimer (1880-1934), one of the founding fathers of Gestaltism, illustrates this as such: "I am standing at the window and see a house, trees, sky. And now, for theoretical purposes, I could try to count and say: there are . . . 327 nuances of brightness [and hue]. Do I see '327'? No; I see sky, house, trees" (Wertheimer, cited in Woods et al., 2002, p. 28). The gestalts that Wertheimer sees (house, trees, sky) are primary to their parts (their elements), and they are more than the sum of their parts. There is an immediate orderliness in experiencing the world. Wertheimer inverts the empiricist claim and information-processing assumption: Rather than meaning being the result of mental operations on elementary stimuli, it actually takes painstaking mental effort (counting 327 nuances of brightness and hue) to reduce primary sensations to their primitive elements. We do not perceive elements: We perceive meaning. Meaning comes effortlessly, prerationally. In contrast, it takes cognitive work to see elements. In the words of William James' senior Harvard colleague Chauncey Wright, there is no antecedent chaos that requires some intrapsychic glue to prevent percepts from falling apart. New Horizons (Again) Empiricism does not recognize the immediate orderliness of experience because it does not see relations as real aspects of immediate experience (Heft, 2001). Relations, according to empiricists, are a product of mental (information) processing. This is true for theories of situation awareness. For them, relations between elements are mental artifacts. They get imposed through stages of processing. Subsequent levels of SA add relationships to elements by linking those elements to current meanings and future projections. The problem of the relationship between matter and mind is not at all solved through empiricist responses. But perhaps engineers and designers, as well as many experimental psychologists, are happy to hear about elements (or 327 nuances of brightness and hue), for those can be manipulated in a design prototype and experimentally tested on subjects. Wundt would have done the same thing. Not unlike Wundt 100 years before him, Ulrich Neisser warned in 1976 that psychology was not quite ready for grand questions about consciousness. Neisser feared that models of cognition would treat consciousness as if it were just a particular stage of processing in a mechanical flow of information. His fears were justified in the mid-1970s, as many psychological models did exactly that. Now they have done it again. Awareness, or consciousness, is equated to a stage of processing along an intrapsychic pathway (levels of SA). As Neisser pointed out, this is an old idea in psychology. The three levels of SA in vogue today were anticipated by Freud, who even sup­ plied flowcharts and boxes in his Interpretation of Dreams to map the movements from unconscious (level 1) to preconscious (level 2) to conscious (level 3). The popularity of finding a home, a place, a structure for consciousness in the head is irresistible, said Neisser, as it allows psychology to nail down its most elusive target (consciousness) to a box in a flowchart. There is a huge cost, though. Along with the deconstruction and mechanization of mental phenomena comes their dehuminization. Information-processing theories have lost much of their appeal and credibility. Many realize how they have corrupted the spirit of the postbehaviorist cognitive revolution by losing sight of humanity and meaning making. Empiricism (or British empiricism) has slipped into history as a school of thought at the beginning of psychological theorizing. Yet both form legitimate offshoots in current understandings of situation awareness. Notions similar to those of empiricism and information processing are reinvented under new guises, which reintroduces the same type of foundational problems, while leaving some of the really hard problems unaddressed. The problem of the nature of stimuli is one of those, and associated with it is the problem of meaning making. How does the mind make sense of those stimuli? Is meaning the end-product of a processing pathway that flows from periphery to center? These are enormous problems in the history of psychology, all of them problems of the relationship between mind and matter, and all essentially still unresolved. Perhaps they are fundamentally unsolvable within the dualist tradition that psychology inherited from Descartes. Some movements in human factors are pulling away from the experimental psychological domination. The idea of distributed cognition has renewed the status of the environment as active, constituent participant in cognitive processes, closing the gap between res cogitans and res extensa. Other people, artifacts, and even body parts are part of the res cogitans. How is it otherwise that a child learns to count on his hand, or a soccer player thinks with her feet? Concomitant interest in cognitive work analysis and cognitive systems engineering see such joint cognitive systems as units of analysis, not the constituent human or machine components. Qualitative methods such as ethnography are increasingly legitimate, and critical for understanding distributed cognitive systems. These movements have triggered and embodied what has now become known as the second cognitive revolution, recapturing and rehabilitating the impulses that brought to life the first. How do people make meaning? In order to begin to answer such aboriginal questions, it is now increasingly held as justifiable and necessary to throw the human factors net wider than experimental psychology. Other forms of social inquiry can shed more light on how we are goal-driven crea­ tures in actual, dynamic environments, not passive recipients of snapshot stimuli in a sterile laboratory. The concerns of these thinkers overlap with functionalist approaches, which formed yet another psychology of protest against Wundt's elemetarism. The same protest works equally well against the mechanization of mind by the information-processing school. A century ago, functionalists (William James was one of their foremost exponents) pointed out how people are integrated, living organisms engaged in goal-directed activities, not passive element processors locked into laboratory headrests, buffeted about by one-shot stimuli from an experimental apparatus. The environment in which real activities play out helps shape the organism's responses. Psychological functioning is adaptive: It helps the organism survive and adjust, by incrementally modifying and tweaking its composition or its behavior to generate greater gains on whatever dimension is relevant. Such ecological thinking is now even beginning to seep into approaches to system safety, which has so far also been dominated by mechanistic, structuralist models (see chap. 2). James was not just a functionalist, hoever. In fact, he was one of the most all-round psychologists ever. His views on radical empiricism are one great way to access novel thinking about situ­ ation awareness and sensemaking, and only appropriate against a background of increasing interest in the role of ecological psychology in human factors. RADICAL EMPIRICISM Radical empiricism is one way of circumventing the insurmountable problems associated with psychologies based on dualistic traditions, and William James introduced it as such at the beginning of the 20th century. Radical empiricism rejects the notion of separate mental and material worlds; it rejects dualism. James adhered to an empiricist philosophy, which holds that our knowledge comes (largely) from our discoveries, our experience. But, as Heft (2001) pointed out, James' philosophy is radically empiricist. What is experienced, according to James, is not elements, but relations—meaingful relations. Experienced relations are what perception is made up of. Such a position can account for the orderliness of experience, as it does not rely on subsequent, or a posteriori mental processing. Orderliness is an aspect of the ecology, of our world as we experience it and act in it. The world as an ordered, structured universe is experienced, not constructed through mental work. James dealt with the matter-mind problem by letting the knower and the known coincide during the moment of perception (which itself is a constant, uninterrupted flow, rather than a moment). Ontologies (our being in the world) are characterized by continual transactions between knower and known. Order is not imposed on experience, but is itself experienced. Variations of this approach have always represented a popular countermove in the history of psychology of consciousness. Rather than containing consciousness in a box in the head, it is seen as an aspect of activity. Weick (1995) used the term "enactment" to indicate how people produce the environment they face and are aware of. By acting in the world, people continually create environments that in turn constrain their interpretations, and consequently constrain their next possible actions. This cyclical, ongoing nature of cognition and sensemaking has been recognized by many (see Neisser, 1976) and challenges common interpretations rooted in information-processing psychology where stimuli precede meaning making and (only then) action, and where frozen snapshots of environmental status can be taken as legitimate input to the human processing system. Instead, activities of individuals are only partially triggered by stimuli, because the stimulus itself is produced by activity of the individual. This moved Weick (1995) to comment that sensemaking never starts; that people are always in the middle of things. Although we may look back on our own experience as consisting of discrete events, the only way to get this impression is to step out of that stream of experience and look down on it from a position of outsider, or retrospective outsider. It is only possi­ ble, really, to pay direct attention to what already exists (that which has already passed): "Whatever is now, at the present moment, under way will determine the meaning of whatever has just occurred" (Weick, p. 27). Situ­ ation awareness is in part about constructing a plausible story of the process by which an outcome continuing airworthines management exposition about, and the reconstruction of immediate history probably plays a dominant role in this. Few theories of situation awareness acknowledge this role, actually, instead directing their analytics to the creation of meaning from elements and the future projection of that meaning. Radical empiricism does not take the stimulus as its starting point, as does information processing, and neither does it need a-flosteriori processes (mental, representational) to impose orderliness on sensory impressions. We already experience orderliness and relationships through ongoing, goal-oriented transactions of acting and perceiving. Indeed what we experience during perception is not some cognitive end product in the head. Neisser reminded us of this longstanding issue in 1976 too: Can it be true that we see our own retinal images? The theoretical distance that then needs to be bridged is too large. For if we see that retinal image, who does the looking? Homunculus explanations were unavoidable (and often still are in information processing). Homunculi do not solve the problem of awareness, they simply relocate it. Rather than a little man in our heads looking at what we are looking at, we ourselves are aware of the world, and its structure, in the world. As Edwin Holt put it, "Consciousness, whenever it is localized at all in space, is not in the skull, but is 'out there' precisely where it appears to be" (cited in Heft, 2001, p. 59). James, and the entire ecological school after him, anticipated this. What is perceived, according to James, is not a replica, not a simile of something out there. What is perceived is already out there. There are no intermediaries between perceiver and percept; perceiving is direct. This position forms the groundwork of ecological approaches in psychology and human factors. If there is no separation between matter and mind, then there is no gap that needs bridging; there is no need for reconstructive processes in the mind that make sense of elementary stimuli. The Venn diagram with a little and a larger circle that depict actual and ideal situation awareness is su­ perfluous too. Radical empiricism allows human factors to stick closer to the anthropologist's ideal of describing and capturing insider accounts. If there is no separation between mind and matter, between actual and ideal situation awareness, then there is no risk of getting trapped in judging performance by use of extrogenous criteria; criteria imported from out­ side the setting (informed by hindsight or some other source of omnis­ cience about the situation that opens up that delta, or gap, between what the observer inside the situation knew and what the researcher knows). What the observer inside the situation knows must be seen as canonical— it must be understood not in relation to some normative ideal. For the radical empiricist, there would not be two circles in the Venn diagram, but rather different rationalities, different understandings of the situation— none of them right or wrong or necessarily better or worse, but all of them coupled directly to the interests, expectations, knowledge, and goals of the respective observer. DRIFTING OFF TRACK: REVISITING A CASE OF "LOST SITUATION AWARENESS" Let us go back to the Royal Majesty. Traditionalist ideas about a lack of correspondence between a material and a mental world get a boost from this sort of case. A crew ended up 17 miles off track, after a day and a half of sailing. How could this happen? As said before, hindsight makes it easy to see where people were, versus where they thought they were. In hind­ sight, it is easy to point to the cues and indications that these people should have picked up in order to update or correct or even form their understanding of the unfolding situation around them. Hindsight has a way of exposing those elements that people missed, and a way of amplifying or exaggerating their importance. The key question is not why people did not see what we now know was important. The key question is how they made sense of the situation the way they did. What must the crew in question at the time have seen? How could they, on the basis of their expe­ riences, construct a story that was coherent and plausible? What were the processes by which they became sure that they were right about their position? Let us not question the accuracy of the insider view. Research into situation awareness already does enough of that. Instead, let us try to understand why that insider view was plausible for people at the time, why it was, in fact, the only possible view. Departure From Bermuda The Royal Majesty departed Bermuda, bound for Boston at 12:00 noon on the 9th of June 1995. The visibility was good, the winds light, and the sea calm. Before departure the navigator checked the navigation and communication equipment. He found it in "perfect operating condition." About half an hour after departure the harbor pilot disembarked and the course was set toward Boston. Just before 13:00 there was a cutoff in the signal from the GPS (Global Positioning System) antenna, routed on the fly bridge (the roof of the bridge), to the receiver—leaving the receiver without satellite signals. Postaccident examination showed that the antenna cable had separated from the antenna connection. When it lost satellite reception, the GPS promptly defaulted to dead reckoning (DR) mode. It sounded a brief aural alarm and displayed two codes on its tiny display: DR and SOL. These alarms and codes were not noticed. (DR means that the position is estimated, or deduced, hence "ded," or now "dead," reckoning. SOL means that satellite positions cannot be calculated.) The ship's autopilot would stay in DR mode for the remainder of the journey. Why was there a DR mode in the GPS in the first place, and why was a de­ fault to that mode neither remarkable, nor displayed in a more prominent way on the bridge? When this particular GPS receiver was manufactured (during the 1980s), the GPS satellite system was not as reliable as it is today. The receiver could, when satellite data was unreliable, temporarily use a DR mode in which it estimated positions using an initial position, the gyrocom­ pass for course input and a log for speed input. The GPS thus had two modes, normal and DR. It switched autonomously between the two depending on the accessibility of satellite signals. By 1995, however, GPS satellite coverage was pretty much complete, and had been working well for years. The crew did not expect anything out of the ordinary. The GPS antenna was moved in February, because parts of the superstructure occasionally would block the incoming signals, which caused temporary and short (a few minutes, according to the captain) periods of DR navigation. This was to a great extent remedied by the antenna move, as the Cruise Line's electronics technician testified. People on the bridge had come to rely on GPS position data and considered other systems to be backup systems. The only times the GPS positions could not be counted on for accuracy were during these brief, normal episodes of signal blockage. Thus, the whole bridge crew was aware of the DR-mode option and how it worked, but none of them ever imagined or were prepared for a sustained loss of satellite data caused by a cable break—no previous loss of satellite data had ever been so swift, so absolute, and so long lasting. When the GPS switched from normal to DR on this journey in June 1995, an aural alarm sounded and a tiny visual mode annunciation appeared on the display. The aural alarm sounded like that of a digital wristwatch and was less than a second long. The time of the mode change was a busy time (shortly after departure), with multiple tasks and distractors competing for the crew's attention. A departure involves complex maneuvering, there are several crew members on the bridge, and there is a great deal of communication. When a pilot disembarks, the operation is time constrained and risky. In such situations, the aural signal could easily have been drowned out. No one was expecting a reversion to DR mode, and thus the visual indi­ cations were not seen either. From the insider perspective, there was no alarm, as there was not going to be a mode default. There was neither a history, nor an expectation of its occurrence. Yet even if the initial alarm was missed, the mode indication was continuously available on the little GPS display. None of the bridge crew saw it, according to their testimonies. If they had seen it, they knew what it meant, lit­ erally translated—dead reckoning means no satellite fixes. But as we saw before, there is a crucial difference between data that in hindsight can be shown to have been available and data that were observable at the time. The indications on the little display (DR and SOL) were placed between two rows of numbers (representing the ship's latitude and longitude) and were about one sixth the size of those numbers. There was no difference in the size and character of the position indications after the switch to DR. The size of the display screen was about 7.5 by 9 centimeters, and the receiver was placed at the aft part of the bridge on a chart table, behind a curtain. The location is reasonable, because it places the GPS, which supplies risk achievement worth position data, next to the chart, which is normally placed on the chart table. Only in combination with a chart do the GPS data make sense, and further­ more the data were forwarded to the integrated bridge system and displayed there (quite a bit more prominently) as well. For the crew of the Royal Majesty, this meant that they would have to leave the forward console, actively look at the display, and expect to see more than large digits representing the latitude and longitude. Even then, if they had seen the two-letter code and translated it into the expected behavior of the ship, it is not a certainty that the immediate conclusion would have been "this ship is not heading towards Boston anymore," because temporary DR reversions in the past had never led to such dramatic departures from the planned route. When the officers did leave the forward console to plot a position on the chart, they looked at the display and saw a position, and nothing but a position, because that is what they were expecting to see. It is not a question of them not attending to the indications. They were attending to the indications, the position indications, because plotting the position it is the professional thing to do. For them, the mode change did not exist. But if the mode change was so nonobservable on the GPS display, why was it not shown more clearly somewhere else? How could one small failure have such an effect—were there no backup systems? The Royal Majesty had a modern integrated bridge system, of which the main component was the navigation and command system (NACOS). The NACOS consisted of two parts, an autopilot part to keep the ship on course and a map construction part, where simple maps could be created and displayed on a radar screen. When the Royal Majesty was being built, the NACOS and the GPS receiver were delivered by different manufacturers, and they, in turn, used different versions of electronic communication standards. Due to these differing standards and versions, valid position data and in­ valid DR data sent from the GPS to the NACOS were both labeled with the same code (GP). The installers of the bridge equipment were not told, nor did they expect, that (GP-labeled) position data sent to the NACOS would be anything but valid position data. The designers of the NACOS expected that if invalid data were received, they would have another format. As a result, the GPS used the same data label for valid and invalid data, and thus the autopilot could not distinguish between them. Because the NACOS could not de­ tect that the GPS data was invalid, the ship sailed on an autopilot that was using estimated positions until a few minutes before the grounding. A principal function of an integrated bridge system is to collect data such as depth, speed, and position from different sensors, which are then shown on a centrally placed display to provide the officer of the watch with an overview of most of the relevant information. The NACOS on the Royal Majesty was placed at the forward part of the bridge, next to the radar screen. Current technological systems commonly have multiple levels of atomation with multiple mode indications on many displays. An adaptation of work strategy is to collect these in the same place and another solution is to integrate data from many components into the same display surface. This presents an integration problem for shipping in particular, where quite often components are delivered by different manufacturers. The centrality of the forward console in an integrated bridge system also sends the implicit message to the officer of the watch that navigation may have taken place at the chart table in times past, but the work is now performed at the console. The chart should still be used, to be sure, but only as a backup option and at regular intervals (customarily every half-hour or ev­ ery hour). The forward console is perceived to be a clearing house for all the information needed to safely navigate the ship. As mentioned, the NACOS consisted of two main parts. The GPS sent position data (via the radar) to the NACOS in order to keep the ship on track (autopilot part) and to position the maps on the radar screen (map part). The autopilot part had a number of modes that could be manually selected: NAV and COURSE. NAV mode kept the ship within a certain dis­ tance of a track, and corrected for drift caused by wind, sea, and current. COURSE mode was similar but the drift was calculated in an alternative way. The NACOS also had a DR mode, in which the position was continu­ ously estimated. This backup calculation was performed in order to compare the NACOS DR with the position received from the GPS. To calculate the NACOS DR position, data from the gyrocompass and Doppler log were used, but the initial position was regularly updated with GPS data. When the Royal Majesty left Bermuda, the navigation officer chose the NAV mode and the input continuing airworthines management exposition from the GPS, normally selected by the crew during the 3 years the vessel had been in service. If the ship had deviated from her course by more than a preset limit, or if the GPS position had differed from the DR position calculated by the autopilot, the NACOS would have sounded an aural and clearly shown a visual alarm at the forward console (the position-fix alarm). There were no alarms because the two DR positions calculated by the NACOS and the GPS were identical. The NACOS DR, which was the perceived backup, was using GPS data, believed to be valid, to refresh its DR position at regular intervals. This is because the GPS was sending DR data, estimated from log and gyro data, but labeled as valid data. Thus, the radar chart and the autopilot were using the same inaccurate position information and there was no display or warn­ ing of the fact that DR positions (from the GPS) were used. Nowhere on the integrated display could the officer on watch confirm what mode the GPS was in, and what effect the mode of the GPS was having on the rest of the automated system, not to mention the ship. In addition to this, there were no immediate and perceivable effects on the ship because the GPS calculated positions using the log and the gyrocompass. It cannot be expected that a crew should become suspicious of the fact that the ship actually is keeping her speed and course. The combination of a busy departure, an unprecedented event (cable break) together with a nonevent (course keeping), and the change of the locus of naviga­ tion (including the intrasystem communication difficulties) shows that it made sense, in the situation and at the time, that the crew did not know that a mode change had occurred. The Ocean Voyage Even if the crew did not know about a mode change immediately after departure, there was still a long voyage at sea ahead. Why did none of the offi­ cers check the GPS position against another source, such as the Loran-C receiver that was placed close to the GPS? (Loran-C is a radio navigation system that relies on land-based transmitters.) Until the very last minutes before the grounding, the ship did not act strangely and gave no reason for suspecting that anything was amiss. It was a routine trip, the weather was good and the watches and watch changes uneventful. Several of the officers actually did check the displays of both Loran and GPS receivers, but only used the GPS data (because those had been more reliable in their experience) to plot positions on the paper chart. It was vir­ tually impossible to actually observe the implications of a difference be­ tween Loran and GPS numbers alone. Moreover, there were other kinds of cross-checking. Every hour, the position on the radar map was checked against the position on the paper chart, and cues in the world (e.g., sighting of the first buoy) were matched with GPS data. Another subtle reassurance to officers must have been that the master on a number of occasions spent several minutes checking the position and progress of the ship, and did not make any corrections. Before the GPS antenna was moved, the short spells of signal degradation that lead to DR mode also caused the radar map to jump around on the radar screen (the crew called it "chopping") because the position would change erratically. The reason chopping was not observed on this particu­ lar occasion was that the position did not change erratically, but in a man­ ner consistent with dead reckoning. It is entirely possible that the satellite signal was lost before the autopilot was switched on, thus causing no shift in position. The crew had developed a strategy to deal with this occurrence in the past. When the position-fix alarm sounded, they first changed modes (from NAV to COURSE) on the autopilot and then they acknowledged the alarm. This had the effect of stabilizing the map on the radar screen so that it could be used until the GPS signal returned. It was an unreliable strategy, because the map was being used without knowing the extent of error in its positioning on the screen. It also led to the belief that, as mentioned earlier, the only time the GPS data were unreliable was during chopping. Chopping was more or less alleviated by moving the antenna, which means that by eliminating one problem a new pathway for accidents was created. The strategy of using the position-fix alarm as a safeguard no longer covered all or most of the instances of GPS unreliability. This locally efficient procedure would almost certainly not be found in any manuals, but gained legitimacy through successful repetition becoming common practice over time. It may have sponsored the belief that a sta­ ble map is a good map, with the crew concentrating on the visible signs instead of being wary of the errors hidden below the surface. The chopping problem had been resolved for about 4 months, and trust in the automa­ tion grew. First Buoy to Grounding Looking at the unfolding sequence of events from the position of retro­ spective outsider, it is once again easy to point to indications missed by the crew. Especially toward the end of the journey, there appears to be a larger number of cues that could potentially have revealed the true nature of the situation. There was an inability of the first officer to positively identify the first buoy that marked the entrance of the Boston sea lanes (such lanes form a separation scheme delineated on the chart to keep meeting and crossing traffic at a safe distance and to keep ships away from dangerous areas) . A position error was still not suspected, even with the vessel close to the shore. The lookouts reported red lights and later blue and white water, but the second officer did not take any action. Smaller ships in the area broadcasted warnings on the radio, but nobody on the bridge of the Royal Majesty interpreted those to concern their vessel. The second officer failed to see the second buoy along the sea lanes on the radar, but told the master that it had been sighted. In hindsight, there were numerous opportunities to avoid the grounding, which the crew consistently failed to recognize (NTSB, 1997). Such conclusions are based on a dualist interpretation of situation awareness. What matters to such an interpretation is the accuracy of the mapping between an external world that can be pieced together in hindsight (and that contains shopping bags full of epiphanies never opened by those who needed them most) and people's internal representation of that world. This internal representation (or situation awareness) can be shown to be clearly deficient, as falling far short of all the cues that were available. But making claims about the awareness of other people at another time and place requires us to put ourselves in their shoes and limit ourselves to what they knew. We have to find out why people thought they were in the right place, or had the right assessment of the situation around them. What made that so? Remember, the adequacy or accuracy of an insider's representation of the situation cannot be called into question: It is what counts for them, and it is what drives further action in that situation. Why was it plausible for the crew to conclude that they were in the right place? What did their world look like to them (not: How does it look now to retrospective observers)? The first buoy ("BA") in the Boston traffic lanes was passed at 19:20 on the 10th of June, or so the chief officer thought (the buoy identified by the first officer as the BA later turned out to be the "AR" buoy located about 15 miles to the west-southwest of the BA). To the chief officer, there was a buoy on the radar, and it was where he expected it to be, it was where it should be. It made sense to the first officer to identify it as the correct buoy because the echo on the radar screen coincided with the mark on the radar map that signified the BA. Radar map and radar world matched. We now know that the overlap between radar map and radar return was a mere stochastic fit. The map showed the BA buoy, and the radar showed a buoy return. A fascinating coincidence was the sun glare on the ocean surface that made it impossible to visually identify the BA. But independent cross-checking had already occurred: The first officer probably verified his position by two in­ dependent means, the radar map and the buoy. The officer, however, was not alone in managing the situation, or in making sense of it. An interesting aspect of automated navigation systems in real workplaces is that several people typically use it, in partial overlap and consecutively, like the watch-keeping officers on a ship. At 20:00 the second officer took over the watch from the chief officer. The chief officer must have provided the vessel's assumed position, as is good watch-keeping practice. The second officer had no reason to doubt that this was a correct position. The chief officer had been at sea for 21 years, spending 30 of the last 36 months onboard the Royal Majesty. Shortly after the takeover, the second officer reduced the radar scale from 12 to 6 nautical miles. This is normal practice when vessels come closer to shore or other restricted wa­ ters. By reducing the scale, there is less clutter from the shore, and an increased likelihood of seeing anomalies and dangers. When the lookouts later reported lights, the second officer had no ex­ pectation that there was anything wrong. To him, the vessel was safely in the traffic lane. Moreover, lookouts are liable to report everything indiscriminately; it is always up to the officer of the watch to decide whether to take action. There is also a cultural and hierarchical gradient between the officer and the lookouts; they come from different nationalities and backgrounds. At this time, the master also visited the bridge and, just after he left, there was a radio call. This escalation of work may well have distracted the second officer from considering the lookouts' report, even if he had wanted to. After the accident investigation was concluded, it was discovered that two Portuguese fishing vessels had been trying to call the Royal Majesty on the radio to warn her of the imminent danger. The calls were made not long before the grounding, at which time the Royal Majesty was already 16.5 nautical miles from where the crew knew her to be. At 20:42, one of the fishing vessels called, "fishing vessel, fishing vessel call cruise boat," on channel 16 (an international distress channel for emergencies only). Immediately following this first call in English the two fishing vessels started talking to each other in Portuguese. One of the fishing vessels tried to call again a little later, giving the position of the ship he was calling. Calling on the radio without positively identifying the intended receiver can lead to mix-ups. In this case, if the second officer heard the first English call and the ensuing conversation, he most likely disregarded it since it seemed to be two other vessels talking to each other. Such an interpretation makes sense: If one ship calls without identifying the intended receiver, and another ship responds and consequently engages the first caller in conversation, the com­ munication loop is closed. Also, as the officer was using the 6-mile scale, he could not see the fishing vessels on his radar. If he had heard the second call and checked the position, he might well have decided that the call was not for him, as it appeared that he was far from that position. Whomever the fishing ships were calling, it could not have been him, because he was not there. At about this time, the second buoy should have been seen and around 21:20 it should have been passed, but was not. The second officer assumed that the radar map was correct when it showed that they were on course. To him the buoy signified a position, a distance traveled in the traffic lane, and reporting that it had been passed may have amounted to the same thing as reporting that they had passed the position it was (supposed to have been) in. The second officer did not, at this time, experience an accumulation of anomalies, warning him that something was going wrong. In his view, this buoy, which was perhaps missing or not picked up by the radar, was the first anomaly, but not perceived as a significant one. The typical Bridge Procedures Guide says that a master should be called when (a) something unexpected happens, (b) when something expected does not happen (e.g., a buoy), and (c) at any other time of uncertainty. This is easier to write than it is to apply in practice, particularly in a case where crew members do not see what they expected to see. The national transportation safety board report, in typical counterfactual style, lists at least five actions that the officer should have taken. He did not take any of these actions, because he was not missing opportunities to avoid the grounding. He was navigating the vessel safely to Boston. The master visited the bridge just before the radio call, telephoned the bridge about 1 hour after it, and made a second visit around 22:00. The times at which he chose to visit the bridge were calm and uneventful, and did not prompt the second officer to voice any concerns, nor did they trigger the master's interest in more closely examining the apparendy safe handling of the ship. Five minutes before the grounding, a lookout reported blue and white water. For the second officer, these indications alone were no reason for taking action. They were no warnings of anything about to go amiss, because nothing was going to go amiss. The crew knew where they were. Nothing in their situation suggested to them that they were not doing enough or that they should question the accuracy of their awareness of the situation. At 22:20 the ship started to veer, which brought the captain to the bridge. The second officer, still certain that they were in the traffic lane, believed that there was something wrong with the steering. This interpretation would be consistent with his experiences of cues and indications during the trip so far. The master, however, continuing airworthines management exposition to the bridge and saw the situation differently, but was too late to correct the situation. The Royal Majesty ran aground east of Nantucket at 22:25, at which time she was 17 nautical miles from her planned and presumed course. None of the over 1,000 passengers were injured, but repairs and lost revenues cost the company $7 million. With a discrepancy of 17 miles at the premature end to the journey of the Royal Majesty, and a day and a half to discover the growing gap between actual and intended track, the case of loss of SA, or deficient SA, looks like it is made. But the supposed elements that make up all the cues and indications that the crew should have seen, and should have understood, are mostly products of hindsight, products of our ability to look at the unfolding sequence of events from the position of retrospective outsiders. In hindsight, we wonder how these repeated "opportunities to avoid the grounding," these repeated invitations to undergo some kind of epiphany about the real nature of the situation, were never experienced by the people who needed them most. But the revelatory nature of the cues, as well as the structure or coherence that they apparently have in retrospect, are not products of the situation itself or the actors in it. They are retrospective imports. When looked at from the position of retrospective outsider, the deficient SA can look so very real, so compelling. They failed to notice, they did not know, they should have done this or that. But from the point of view of people inside the situation, as well as potential other observers, these deficiencies do not exist in and of themselves; they are artifacts of hindsight, elements removed retrospectively from a stream of action and experience. To people on the inside, it is often nothing more than normal work. If we want to begin to understand why it made sense for people to do what they did, we have to put ourselves in their shoes. What did they know? What was their understanding of the situation? Rather than construing the case as a loss of SA (which simply judges other people for not seeing what we, in our retrospective omniscience, would have seen), there is more explanatory leverage in seeing the crew's actions as normal processes of sensemak- ing—of transactions between goals, observations, and actions. As Weick (1995) pointed out, sensemaking is something that preserves plausibility and coherence, something that is reasonable and memorable, something that embodies past experience and expectations, something that resonates with other people, something that can be constructed retrospectively but also can be used prospectively, something that captures both feeling and thought ... In short, what is necessary in sensemaking is a good story. A good story holds disparate elements together long enough to energize and guide action, plausibly enough to allow people to make retrospective sense of whatever happens, and engagingly enough that others will contribute their own inputs in the interest of sensemaking. (p. 61) Even if one does make concessions to the existence of elements, as Weick does, it is only for the role they play in constructing a plausible story of what is going on, not for building an accurate mental simile of an external world somewhere "out there."