Title: Chapter 2 Why Do Accidents Happen? A Critical Review on the Evolution of the Construction Accident Causation Models Author(s): Category: Safety Tags: Safety, Accidents, Model The high accident rate in construction is a universal problem that needs to be tackled by all parties concerned (Poon et al., 2008). Although in the last decade, there was a downward trend in construction accidents in many places, such as Hong Kong, due to the implementation of numerous safety schemes, improvement in construction accident records is still necessary (Figs. 2.1, 2.2). A previous research study in Hong Kong has shown that an accident imposes huge costs on society (UK HM Revenue and Customs Department 2011), and over $10 million of compensation was paid for non-fatal accidents each year during 2004–2008 (Table 2.1). The direct financial costs of accidents are only the tip of the iceberg when compared with the indirect ones. The injured employees and their families suffer from loss of earnings and grief. Accidents on site also lower staff morale, induce a negative corporate image and lead to an extension of time in the project because of work re-arrangements (Li 2006). This chapter aims to study and analyze the evolution of accident causation models. In the early 20th century, structural members were designed primarily to carry gravity loads. Advances in structural design and building materials reduce building weight; taller building construction, which can house more people, has gained popularity. Among the fifty tallest buildings in the world, only one was constructed in the 1960s, and the majority were constructed in the 1980s and after (Toole 2002). Nevertheless, building slenderness increases also implies that lateral load consideration becomes more important (Debrah and Ofori 2001a, b). Before the 1980s, building firms enjoyed post-war expansion due to rebuilding, capital investment catch-up, and increasing levels of immigration, which provided economic buoyancy. Clients were led by their design team—they were not encouraged to be involved to a significant degree during decision-making in design and construction; design and construction were separated (Zhu et al. 2010). Between 1980 and 1999, the traditional procurement method was losing ground (Kim and Rhee 2009), and design and build gained popularity. The time, cost, and quality became part of the construction service ethos. Since 1999, practitioners in Australia and the UK Latham stressed construction productivity and efficiency and multi-skilling of the trades to reduce disputes between unions and trades (Zhu et al. 2010). Clients seek solutions rather than pure construction services (Lingard and Rowlinson 1994). Concepts from manufacturing such as best practice, quality assurance bench-marking, and re-engineering have influenced the construction industry, and pre-qualification criteria for consultants, contractors, and sub-contractors adopted. Integrated forms of procurement based on the principles of concurrent engineering (CE), which promotes cooperation and collaboration between project participants from the outset of a project, have been advocated. Moreover, with the client’s and project advisor’s involvement during design development, the project team can jointly develop the project goals and objectives (Zhu et al. 2010). Construction industry has long been regarded as a labor intensive industry. Construction of bridges, buildings, dams, etc., has been done by a great number of workers. International Alliance of Interoperability (IAI) founded in the USA in 1995 turned on the engine of digital construction, system-independent exchange of information between all stakeholders was developed (Lin and Mills 2001). In the ten years’ time since the mid-1990s, information technology has changed the world of the construction industry. computer-aided design drawings have replaced handmade drawings, video conferencing has replaced frequent freight face-to-face meetings, digital take-off has replaced traditional black and white take-off, and dynamic building information modeling has replaced static building design. Within this decade, man-made construction and design methods have been replaced by ‘‘n’’ kinds of software for quantity surveyors, architects, engineers, form workers, and architects. If we view each of these from the system point of view, there are many newborn subsystems in different parts of the globe each day. The World Wide Web even helps us share new building knowledge in the blink of an eye. All these technologies help us build faster but complicate the whole construction process at the same time—what the best method today does not mean it is the best for tomorrow. We are all trying to catch up with the latest technology. Moreover, all the building services installations were carried out on site before 1980; with the help of modern technology, off-site fabrication of some building services components has become possible (Hwang et al. 2010). The design of tall, asymmetric, and specially shaped buildings has gained popularity (Rowlinson 1997). Building technical complexity has also increased (Chun et al. 2012), and a profound understanding of the force flow in these types of structures is not easy as the building plan is not constant along the height of the building (Rowlinson 1997). According to Darwin, ‘‘… each new variety, and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by having some advantage over those with which it comes into competition; and the consequent extinction of less favored forms almost inevitably follows’’ (Crotty 2009). The evolution theory of Darwin and Wallace is based on the mechanism of natural selection, where such process stresses that organisms are better adapted to survive and breed (World Bank 2010). Human evolution is one of the very good examples (Cecchetti 2009). Lamarckian Evolution states that a change in environment may lead to changed patterns of behavior, which can necessitate new use of structures (Central Intelligence Agency 2010). Academic researchers developed construction accident causation models as early as 1960. Since then, many different accident causation models have appeared in journals and books. Complexities in building construction due to increases in building height, construction procurement, and technology have led to a number of construction accident causation models developed over time. Our building and construction environment has become more complicated, and so have our accident causation models (Fig. 2.3). Haddon suggested that an accident happens when there is an excess energy transfer (Lin and Mills 2001). Accident-causing agents such as electrical, mechanical, and thermal, energy can lead to accidents. This model suggests that the occurrence of an accident basically follows the laws in physics: it happens after there is an excess amount of uncontrolled energy and consequences depend on the amount of energy (Briere et al. 2010). Yet this model has received some complaints from Lingard and Rowlinson (2005) who pinpoint that the abstract nature of this model fails to lay down a good foundation in identifying hazards in routine work. It also fails to suggest the appropriate safety measures under different circumstances (Briere et al. 2010). In 1974, it was suggested that an accident could be viewed as the last domino in the ' domino sequence,’ where an accident is the result of a sequence of events. The first domino falls on the second one, and the second one’s fall leads to the fall of the third domino, and so on and so forth. Bird suggested that workers will be safe so long as the first domino, i.e., site management, does not fall (Briere et al. 2010). However, other researchers point out that there are many factors that lead to accidents. It is inappropriate to regard accidents as the last event in a sequence (Li 2006). It can be the case like the last straw being placed on the camel (Fig. 2.4). Pheng and Shiua's (2000) contention was that these unsafe conditions were symptoms of management oversight and mismanagement in planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating, and control. Nevertheless, such a model has failed to make a clear relationship between various relations among personal and organizational factors. Readers of the domino sequence may misunderstand that personal factors and mental stress play the same role in accidents. Hence, such a theory often leads to a false interpretation of the underlying accident causation factors. This is particularly true for high-ranking officers who usually do not have to work on-site and lack in-depth safety knowledge (Briere et al. 2010). Heinrich (1980) proposed that more than one-fifth of accidents are caused by a series of unsafe acts, which finally lead to accidents occurring. He further elaborates that the degree of injury is a matter of probability. Nevertheless, Cooke and Lingard (2011) suggest that Heinrich’s model focuses too much on the immediate circumstances surrounding the incidents; it fails to include unsafe conditions, which also have systemic and organizational causes. Furthermore, it is misguided to attribute incidents to the interaction of multiple causes. Leather (1987) proposes that both endogenic and exogenic factors might affect the potential accident subject’s acts and thoughts, which might lead to accidents in the Potential Accident Subject (PAS) model. The PAS stresses the dynamic relationship between various stakeholders in accidents, e.g., workers, managers within the construction companies, or even those people who work outside the construction companies. Under the PAS model, any person, even the victim himself, can be the ‘‘Potential Accident Subject’’. Furthermore, rewards, management systems, punishment, training, instructions given by seniors, and so on affect people's behaviors and attitudes. Some rewards for finishing tasks quickly may induce workers to take shortcuts and ignore the possible sources of risks (Li 2006) (Fig. 2.5). Rasmussen suggested that construction laborers’ work is shaped by economic, functional, and safety-related objectives and constraints. The model identifies three zones: a safe zone (where the workers’ behaviors comply with safety rules), a hazard zone, and a loss of control zone. Most of the construction managers on-site work along the cost gradient, and the workers search for the least effort gradient. All these end up with a systematic migration toward the boundary of acceptable performance only. In view of this, safety plans on site are often designed to act against the pressures outlined in the model. Nevertheless, the pressures that push workers toward the safe zone require a continuous effort. Rasmussen, therefore, proposes that accident prevention should focus on error-tolerant work systems development, which makes the boundary of loss of control reversible and visible (Eun and Resnick 2009) (Fig. 2.6). Kjellen (2010) sheds light on human and environment interaction from an operator’s point of view. Under this model, people are viewed as information processors who make their own judgments in response to environmental risks, hazards, or deviations. Accidents happen when people are unable to handle information under complicated circumstances. Accident analysis is a very good practice for identifying and evaluating the safety risks on site and providing suitable safety measures. Yet, this model suffers from two very major drawbacks. Firstly, the model only sheds light on ‘cold’ variables with regard to human cognitive processes, which do not conform well with real-life situations. In reality, emotional variables such as threats affect people’s ability to solve problems and prevent accidents. Secondly, internal information processes are absent. Interpretation by actual behavior observations and interviews becomes necessary, but this requires expertise. Because of the two aforementioned problems, the application of this model is limited to in-depth investigation with expert participation (Li 2006). Conventional safety theorists focus their lens on finding out about accidents and injuries. There is, however, a trend in encompassing environmental factors that may be possible to cause an accident. Based on this idea, the Epidemiological Model views accidents as a disease entity that arises as a product of interaction between the agent, environment, and host (Goetsch 2003). Nevertheless, whether the agent in accidents can be meaningfully separated from its environment is in doubt (Hacker and Suchman 1963). Building on Rasmussen’s model and various construction accident causation models in the past, this model identifies various variables that influence the probability of accidents during construction activity. While the arrows in the figure indicate cause-effect relationships, the signs show the directions of the relationship between different factors. A positive sign indicates that when there are changes in factor X, Y changes in the same direction. A negative sign signifies the effect of changes in an opposite way. This model proposes that unpredictable tasks and environments increase the likelihood of accidents as it increases the likelihood of errors, hazardous situations, and production pressures (Eun and Re-snick 2009) (Fig. 2.7). To conclude, all the seven writers suggest that accidents are not random occurrences. Accidents happen because of failure in one or more factors. Nevertheless, when we take a closer look at the development of accident causation models over the years from 1961, we can see an interesting phenomenon: the models are getting more and more complicated (see Table 2.2). Accident causation models before the mid-80s were a lot simpler than the later models, i.e., complicated models ‘‘survive’’ in natural selection. It is predicted that future accident causation models will be more complicated when high technological tools are used on site, construction procurement, and the height of buildings changed, i.e., Lamarckian Evolution also takes place in causation models.